1084599

Oxford Internet Institute, University of Oxford

Candidate Number
Assignment
Term
Title/Question

Word Count

Assignment Cover Sheet

1084599
Thesis
TT
Green Machine Dreams? A Quantitative
Analysis of Sustainable AI Innovation
13,859

I hereby certify as follows:

(a) This thesis or coursework is entirely my own work, except where acknowledg-
ments of other sources are given. I also confirm that this coursework has not
been submitted, wholly or substantially, to another examination at this or any
other University or educational institution;

(b) I have read and understood the Education Committee’s information and guid-
ance on academic good practice and plagiarism at https://www.ox.ac.uk/
students/academic/guidance/skills?wssl=1.

(c) I agree that my work may be checked for plagiarism using Turnitin software
and have read the Notice to Candidates which can be seen at: http://www.
admin.ox.ac.uk/proctors/turnitin2w.shtml, and that I agree to my work being
screened and used as explained in that Notice;

(d) I have clearly indicated (with appropriate references) the presence of all ma-
terial I have paraphrased, quoted or used from other sources, including any
diagrams, charts, tables or graphs.

(e) I have acknowledged appropriately any assistance I have received in addition

to that provided by my [tutor/supervisor/adviser].

(f) I have not sought assistance from a professional agency;

(g) I understand that any false claims for this work will be reported to the Proctors

and may be penalized in accordance with the University regulations.

Please remember:

• To attach a second relevant cover sheet if you have a disability such as dyslexia
or dyspraxia. These are available from the Higher Degrees Office, but the
Disability Advisory Service will be able to guide you.

1

University of Oxford

Green Machine Dreams?
A Quantitative Analysis of Sustainable AI Innovation

Candidate number: 1084599
01. August 2024

Thesis submitted in partial fulfilment of the requirement for the degree
of MSc in Social Data Science at the Oxford Internet Institute at the
University of Oxford

Trinity Term 2024

13,859 words

Abstract

It is indisputable that combating the climate crisis must be a top priority. A promising
approach endorsed by many experts is to use artificial intelligence (AI) to mitigate and
adapt to the effects of climate change. However, these systems themselves cause significant
environmental degradation. Therefore, establishing AI that best contributes to climate
action, requires us to both harness the potential of AI to tackle climate impacts and make
AI itself more sustainable. Given the urgency of the situation, researchers and developers
need to focus their efforts optimally across these objectives. This requires large-scale evi-
dence on the trajectory of sustainable AI innovation, which illuminates areas of progress
and neglect. To this aim, the present thesis investigates whether patents, analysed with
natural language processing (NLP) techniques, provide a relevant perspective to enrich
our understanding of innovation in sustainable AI. Using a text-based classifier, I reveal
that the sustainability of AI is severely under-researched, especially environmental im-
Inventions which utilise AI to further the
pacts that go beyond energy consumption.
sustainability of other products and processes are much more prevalent and focus mostly
on the energy and mobility sectors. Notably, major AI players contribute alarmingly little
to sustainability innovation, despite dominating the overall AI market. These findings not
only highlight the pivotal role of patents in enhancing our understanding of the field, they
also underscore the urgent need for policies that incentivise critical research in sustainable
AI. Importantly, this thesis hopes to facilitate future research into the field by providing
a hand-labelled dataset and a text-based classifier to distinguish between patents using
AI for Sustainability and those improving the Sustainability of AI. Because one thing is
certain: Without effective, evidence-based policy, the current trajectory of sustainable AI
innovation gives little indication that the colourful dreams of sustainable AI will come
true.

Keywords— Sustainability - Artificial Intelligence - Innovation - Patents - Natural
Language Processing

Environmental Disclaimer

As we gain a better understanding of the tremendous environmental costs of AI
systems, it is imperative for scholars and practitioners alike to contribute to making
AI more sustainable. A crucial first step is to make transparent the computational
resources required for training models. This will allow for a better evaluation of
whether these costs are justified and how they might be minimised. In the present
thesis, the following computational and environmental resources were used.

1. Classification models

Hardware specifications: All classification models were computed on the OII
server, using the NVIDIA A100 80GB PCIe GPU.

Training duration: Including experimentation, 343 models were trained with an
average runtime of 22.9 minutes, resulting in a total training time of 7844.4 minutes
or 130.7 hours.1

Energy consumption: In total, the training required 60.74 kWh of energy (es-
timated with Green Algorithms2 as recommended by Bouza, Bugeau, and Lanne-
longue (2023)).

Carbon footprint: This translates to a carbon footprint of 14.04 kg CO2 equiva-
lents (Green Algorithms).

2. Topic models

Hardware specifications: The topic models were also computed on the OII server,
using both the NVIDIA A100 80GB PCIe GPU and the Intel Xeon Gold 6338 CPU.

Training duration: Including experimentation, 7 models were trained with an
average runtime of 6.2 minutes.

Energy consumption: In total, this required 432.30 Wh of energy (Green Algo-
rithms).

Carbon footprint: This translates to a carbon footprint of 99.91 g CO2 equivalents
(Green Algorithms).

1Note that the server is used by several people at a time which impacts the training duration.

By taking the average runtime, I attempt to provide a reasonable estimate.

2https://calculator.green-algorithms.org/

Table of Contents

1 Introduction

1

2 Literature Review and Theoretical Framework

2.1 Sustainable AI . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2.1.1 AI for Sustainability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2.1.2
Sustainability of AI . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2.1.3 Previous work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Innovation in sustainable AI . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2.2
2.3 Patents as a framework of innovation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2.4 Research questions

4
4
4
5
6
6
8
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10

3 Methodology

3.3 Model pipeline

14
3.1 European patents . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
3.2 Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
3.2.1 Patent identification . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
3.2.2 Patent retrieval
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
3.3.1 Data cleaning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
3.3.2 Hand labelling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
3.3.3 Label validation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
3.3.4 Classifier architectures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
3.3.4.1 Model architectures
3.3.4.2
Loss functions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
3.3.4.3 Multimodal input data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
3.3.5 Model evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
. . . . . . . . . . 26
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
3.4.1 AI for Sustainability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
Sustainability of AI . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
3.4.2
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
3.4.3 Environmental impact
3.5 Actor identification . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28

3.3.5.1 Overview of classifier architectures

3.4 Content analysis

4 Results

29
4.1 Classification results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
4.2 SQ 1: Balance in innovation activity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
4.3 SQ 2: AI for Sustainability innovation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
4.4 SQ 3: Sustainability of AI innovation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
4.5 SQ 4: Environmental focus of Sustainability of AI inventions . . . . . 36
4.6 SQ 5: Major actors in sustainable AI patenting . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
4.7 Patents as a framework of sustainable AI innovation . . . . . . . . . . 37

5 Discussion

39
5.1 Principal findings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
5.2 Patent classifier . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39

2

1084599

5.3 Contextualisation in the wider literature . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40
SQ 1: Balance in innovation activity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40
5.3.1
SQ 2: AI for Sustainability innovation . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40
5.3.2
SQ 3: Sustainability of AI innovation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
5.3.3
SQ 4: Environmental focus of Sustainability of AI inventions . 41
5.3.4
5.3.5
SQ 5: Major actors in sustainable AI patenting . . . . . . . . 42
5.3.6 Patents as a framework of sustainable AI innovation . . . . . . 42
5.4 Limitations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
5.5 Avenues of future research . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 44

6 Conclusion

A Keyword searches for Sustainability of AI labelled patents

B Zero-shot topic descriptions

C Environmental impact keyword list

45

57

58

59

3

1 |

Introduction

In March, Google researchers published a paper showcasing FloodHub, the com-
pany’s own Artificial Intelligence (AI) powered flood forecasting system. Using long
short-term memory networks, FloodHub outperforms state-of-the-art modelling sys-
tems and its accurate and timely warnings promise to save thousands of lives world-
wide (Nearing et al., 2024). The initiative is a testament to Google’s belief in the
"transformative role" (Google, 2023) that AI can play in addressing global chal-
lenges, above all the climate crisis. However, Floodhub also exemplifies a broader
narrative that is promoted by many major AI companies: the vision of technology
as a comprehensive and effective solution to planetary health. This narrative has
long since spread. Pointing to projects ranging from waste management to ocean
cleanup, experts across industries and politics celebrate AI as the key to sustain-
ability (UNFCCC, 2024; World Economic Forum, 2024).

However, the story does not end there. Google’s 2024 environmental report reveals
some sobering facts about the sustainability contribution of AI. Over the past five
years, the company’s emissions have soared by 48% - driven mainly by AI infrastruc-
ture (Google, 2024). Similar statistics are being reported across the AI landscape.
Training the prominent GPT3 model, for instance, is estimated to have resulted in
552t CO2 emissions, which is equivalent to 1000 flights from London to New York
(Patterson et al., 2021). The water consumption necessary for cooling AI computing
infrastructure is similarly concerning. P. Li et al. (2023) estimate that by 2027, the
AI sector could account for up to 6.6 billion cubic meters of yearly freshwater con-
sumption - almost two-thirds of the annual consumption of England (Department
for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs, 2024). With compute demands of newly
released systems doubling every 3-4 months (Amodei and Hernandez, 2018), these
figures give rise to a critical question: Can AI truly serve as a solution to the climate
crisis, or does it actually risk exacerbating the problem?

This tension between environmental costs and benefits of AI illustrates a crucial
insight: To work towards "sustainable AI", i.e., AI that is compatible with environ-
mental sustainability, we must engage with two levers simultaneously. The first lever
lies in harnessing AI for Sustainability. As realised in projects like Floodhub, this
approach leverages the automation and prediction potential of AI systems to unlock
progress in climate change mitigation and adaptation. The second lever consists in
improving the Sustainability of AI, for instance by optimising the energy and fresh-
water consumption. Only if both aspects receive sufficient attention, that is, only
if we effectively use AI to advance climate change mitigation and adaptation while
minimising its damaging impact, AI can optimally contribute to our fight against
the climate crisis (van Wynsberghe, 2021).

Importantly, this is not bound to happen automatically. Currently, companies and
researchers show much more interest in showcasing how AI could save the planet
than in reducing the environmental impacts of their models (van Wynsberghe, 2021).
To instead guide research and innovation toward a comprehensive understanding of
both pillars of sustainable AI, we need transparency about the progress that has
been made as well as the gaps that remain. On the one hand, this will enable

1

1084599

researchers and developers to identify and focus on the most pressing problems.
Oftentimes, however, simply pointing out neglected areas and urging innovators to
work on them is not enough. Large AI companies, in particular, may have monetary
incentives that conflict with the developments necessary to establish sustainable AI.
Thus, transparency is also essential for designing effective policy, steering the AI
sector toward sustainable practices and innovation.

While emerging literature discusses the trajectory of sustainable AI research, the
analyses rest on example projects and theoretical use cases, falling short of provid-
ing actual evidence-based transparency. Moreover, despite the most influential AI
players being technology companies, most articles confine their analysis solely to
academic research, thereby overlooking important innovation occurring in the in-
dustry (Akter, 2024; Rolnick et al., 2019; Stein, 2020; Vinuesa et al., 2020). This
thesis sets out to fill this important gap and provide the first large-scale quantitative
analysis of sustainable AI inventions. As a novel methodological approach, I pro-
pose to use patents as a rich data source, resting the analysis on Natural Language
Processing (NLP) techniques. For this, I focus on European patents, analysing on
the following research question:

Are patents, analysed using Natural Language Processing (NLP) techniques, a rele-
vant element of inquiry to improve our understanding of innovation within the field
of sustainable AI?

The answer to this question will be guided by a collection of subquestions which
illuminate different dimensions of sustainable AI innovation. This approach allows
me to obtain a nuanced assessment of the scientific value of a patent analysis in the
context at hand. The subquestions are as follows:

1. How is innovation activity balanced between the fields of Sustainability of AI

and AI for Sustainability?

2. How are inventions using AI for Sustainability clustered across different sectors

and technologies?

3. How are inventions that improve the Sustainability of AI clustered along the

AI pipeline?

4. Which environmental impacts of AI systems do inventions focusing on the

Sustainability of AI attempt to mitigate?

5. Who are the major actors patenting solutions in sustainable AI?

This thesis makes two critical contributions. Firstly, I provide the first large-scale
empirical evaluation of trends and gaps within sustainable AI innovation. The in-
sights generated by this are an essential foundation of policy necessary to align the
AI sector with environmental sustainability. Secondly, I aim to facilitate future
scientific inquiry into this crucial area by testing NLP-based patent analysis as a
novel perspective on innovation in sustainable AI. As part of this project, I present
a classifier trained on a new hand-labelled dataset which allows for a differentiation
between patents using AI for Sustainability and those improving the Sustainability
of AI. This can be used by other scholars to continue and expand this important

2

1084599

line of research. In consequence, the critical contributions made by this paper will
hopefully serve as valuable guidance in establishing truly sustainable AI.

In section 2, I will review the theo-
The rest of this paper proceeds as follows.
retical background and motivate my research questions. Section 3 will detail the
data selection and retrieval and present the empirical strategy. In section 4, I will
present analytical results. After discussing my findings, as well as the strengths and
limitations of this paper in section 5, I will offer a conclusion in section 6.

3

2 | Literature Review and Theoretical Framework

In the following, I review the theoretical background informing this study. First, I
discuss how sustainable AI can be conceptualised. Then, I argue that patents are
a useful lens through which to analyse innovation in this field: Due to companies’
interest in protecting their sustainable AI inventions, patents document a relevant
subset of innovation and expand our understanding of progress in sustainable AI
beyond academia. Finally, I elaborate on how the subquestions presented above
illuminate significant aspects of sustainable AI innovation, allowing me to answer
my overarching research question.

2.1 Sustainable AI

This paper is based on a definition of sustainable AI brought forward by van Wyns-
berghe (2021). In the scope of this thesis, I focus specifically on the environmental
dimension of sustainability, which can be defined as "meeting the resource and ser-
vices needs of current and future generations without compromising the health of
the ecosystem" (Morelli, 2013, p. 5). Following van Wynsberghe (2021), I under-
stand sustainable AI as having two pillars: AI for Sustainability and Sustainability
of AI (see Figure 2.1).

Figure 2.1: Two pillars of sustainable AI

2.1.1 AI for Sustainability

On the one hand, sustainable AI includes technologies which apply AI to broadly fur-
ther sustainability. Coined AI for Sustainability, this branch encompasses projects
such as the FloodHub initiative discussed in the introduction.
In recent years,
a range of AI for Sustainability inventions has been proposed. The AI for SDGs

4

1084599

ThinkTank even published a designated database covering over 13,500 projects which
use AI systems to tackle Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), with over 1000
projects specifically focusing on Climate Action (AI4SDG Think Tank, 2024). No-
tably, while many of these initiatives make important contributions to tackling the
climate crisis, it is important to acknowledge that influential companies have a
vested interest in the narrative of AI as the solution to global challenges. Framing
the climate crisis as a technological problem which can be solved with their own
products, allows AI players to underscore and strengthen their significance and in-
fluence (Morozov, 2013; Nachtwey and Seidl, 2024). As such, it must be carefully
evaluated what benefits AI for Sustainability projects bring and where they may
fall short of actually solving problems. Nonetheless, an analysis by Vinuesa et al.
(2020) suggests that AI for Sustainability innovation can make a significant contri-
bution. Using a consensus-based expert elicitation process, they estimate that AI
may enable the accomplishment of 93% of environmental SDG targets, with partic-
ular benefits relating to modelling climate impacts (Word Economic Forum, 2018),
improving environmental planning, e.g., by detecting desertification (Mohamadi,
Heidarizadi, and Nourollahi, 2016), and optimising energy distribution and usage
(Word Economic Forum, 2018).

2.1.2 Sustainability of AI

Technologies in the second pillar of sustainable AI focus on making AI itself more
sustainable. With AI systems often being portrayed as immaterial and almost in-
herently sustainable (Kuntsman and Rattle, 2019; Saetra, 2023), this aspect tends
to remain overlooked. However, as more and more evidence emerges which quan-
tifies the immense environmental consequences of AI systems, the Sustainability of
AI is starting to gain scientific attention (Verdecchia, Sallou, and Cruz, 2023). By
now, scholars have proposed different soft- and hardware-based approaches to make
AI systems less environmentally damaging. Focusing on algorithm optimisation, for
instance, structure simplification approaches for deep neural networks have been
shown to enable up to 115% energy savings (Zhang, Davoodi, and Hu, 2018). Im-
portantly, research in this field is set to become all the more relevant as AI is being
integrated into societal and business infrastructure: currently estimated at $196.6
billion, the global AI market is projected to reach a size of over $1.7 trillion by 2030
(Grand View Research, 2024a). The consequences of this development are serious:
The global electricity consumption of data centres rose from 204 TWh in 2018 to
460 TWh in 2022 (International Energy Agency, 2024; Masanet et al., 2020). By
2026, even under conservative assumptions, this is expected to increase to as much
as 800 TWh, i.e. almost quadrupling the electricity consumption within 8 years (In-
ternational Energy Agency, 2024). In light of this growth in market size and energy
consumption, improving the Sustainability of AI becomes a key lever in preventing
severe environmental damages.

5

1084599

2.1.3 Previous work

Research which analyses the development of sustainable AI is still in the beginning
stages. So far, most studies focus on just one of the pillars, studying either the
environmental damages resulting from AI models or mapping out their (potential)
sustainability applications (Akter, 2024; Gunderson, Petersen, and Stuart, 2018;
Rolnick et al., 2019; Stein, 2020; Vinuesa et al., 2020). Importantly, this often paints
a one-sided picture by overestimating the positive impact of AI while ignoring the
costs or only considering the environmental harms without acknowledging potential
benefits. Only a handful of studies have provided a more comprehensive overview,
carefully discussing the relationship between risks and benefits (Cowls et al., 2021;
Khakurel et al., 2018; Tomasev et al., 2020).

Problematically, the literature so far relies on theoretical analyses and exemplary
projects. However, especially when providing the policy guidance required for steer-
ing innovation in the right direction, it is imperative to obtain large-scale empirical
evidence (Kaack et al., 2020). Moreover, studies in sustainable AI exhibit a strong
focus on academic research, with industry developments remaining overlooked. How-
ever, as I will argue, companies present a relevant arena of innovation. Not only
are they positioned at the forefront of AI development, but they also generate im-
portant insights about the practical implementation and scalability of AI solutions
in real-world scenarios (Fan, Yan, and Wen, 2023). Confining insights to academic
literature is therefore insufficient for capturing all relevant innovation in the field.
To fill this gap, I propose to use patents as a large-scale data source on innovation
in sustainable AI.

Notably, Verendel (2023) uses a similar approach when analysing AI in climate in-
ventions using US patent data. However, while this constitutes an interesting first
step, the paper only considers higher-level bibliometric patterns, without investi-
gating innovation activity itself. Furthermore, the study does not offer a theory-led
analysis: it investigates sustainable AI as one large area without distinguishing be-
tween the two pillars. As such, it cannot indicate whether different aspects are
sufficiently addressed and to what extent further research needs to be incentivised.
By improving on their work, this thesis will, to the best of my knowledge, provide
the first large-scale analysis of innovation activity within sustainable AI.

2.2 Innovation in sustainable AI

To strengthen the case for patents as a data-source and framework, I will now detail
why companies engage in significant sustainable AI innovation and why they use
patents to protect these inventions.

Research suggests that companies have strong economic reasons to be involved in
sustainability innovation in general. Most importantly, inventing more sustainable
products and processes, such as more eco-friendly business models or production
methods (Adams et al., 2016; G. Li et al., 2019), come with two perks. For one,
eco-friendly operations can directly reduce costs by minimizing resource usage and

6

1084599

waste (Hermundsdottir and Aspelund, 2021; Ram Nidumolu, 2009). However, as
the climate crisis is increasingly recognised as one of the most pressing challenges to
overcome, sustainability also emerges as a powerful instrument to boost a company’s
reputation. Marketing one’s firm and products as environmentally friendly can
gain the support and trust of stakeholders and thus improve market status and
popularity (Gomez-Trujillo, Velez-Ocampo, and Gonzalez-Perez, 2020; G. Li et al.,
2019). While many companies thus relevantly engage in sustainable innovation, it
is important to note, that strong incentives to be perceived as eco-friendly do not
necessarily lead to genuine sustainability efforts. Instead, some inventions may be
"greenwashing" attempts, although this is often difficult to discern in quantitative
data (Z. Yang et al., 2020).

Companies engage in sustainable AI innovation, in particular, for at least two dis-
tinct reasons. For one, it allows AI companies to expand their societal influence. As
discussed, framing the climate crisis as a technological problem to which AI systems
present the solution, allows AI suppliers to position themselves as relevant for soci-
ety and thus gain support and power (Morozov, 2013; Nachtwey and Seidl, 2024).
Most effectively, this narrative can be maintained by presenting inventions such as
FloodHub, which impressively showcase the potential AI holds to address the cli-
mate crisis. AI for Sustainability innovation can therefore be leveraged to associate
AI as a sector with sustainable goals. Engaging in selected innovation concerning
the Sustainability of AI can then create a synergy: it strengthens the notion that
a firm is seriously committed to reducing their environmental impact while feeding
into the idea of AI as a sustainable (and therefore valuable) technology.

A range of tech companies follow this strategy. Google, for instance, have devel-
oped a range of climate-smart technologies, including the Environmental Insights
Explorer, a data-based tool aiming to help policymakers reduce emissions (Mendes,
2023, pp. 191-194). These showcase the potential of using AI for Sustainability.
Additionally, Google innovates the Sustainability of AI and prominently features
such inventions in their external communication. For instance, in their 2022 report
on "Accelerating Climate Action at Google and Beyond", the company presented
a machine-learning-optimised Tensor Processing Unit (TPU) which claims to gen-
erate 93% fewer emissions compared to similar unoptimised servers (Google and
Boston Consulting Group, 2023). Similar patterns can be observed across other
large AI players including Microsoft, Meta, Amazon (Mendes, 2023, pp. 2017-224),
and NVIDIA (NVIDIA, 2022).

Companies without a core AI business have a different incentive to produce sus-
tainable AI inventions. For them, using AI can facilitate the transformation toward
more eco-friendly operations which, as discussed, comes with monetary and reputa-
tional perks. Monetary benefits can often be captured by integrating AI into firm
internal processes such as production, for instance by using smart manufacturing
and maintenance to improve energy efficiency (Bokrantz et al., 2020; Mittal et al.,
2020). Using AI in actual products, on the other hand, often comes with repu-
tational benefits. If products are more sustainable than those of competitors, for
instance by using AI based monitoring to improve efficiency and resource utilisation
Liu et al. (2022), this allows for a differentiation of the firm which in turn can boost

7

1084599

reputation and lead to superior market status (G. Li et al., 2019). Often, AI is
integrated both in firm-internal processes as well as products. For instance, when
looking at the energy sector, AI is used for data-driven and efficient demand fore-
casting and energy management, i.e., provider-level processes, as well as in actual
products such as smart meters (Aslam et al., 2021; Menghi et al., 2019; Wang et al.,
2019).

Both dynamics present strong incentives for firms to engage in sustainable AI in-
novation, speaking for the idea that significant sustainable AI innovation is indeed
generated within the industry context. Note, however, that this does not mean
that companies necessarily have a genuine commitment to climate justice. Many of
these firms contribute massively to global emissions and their "green innovations"
are largely motivated by monetary incentives (Mendes, 2023, pp. 188-224).

2.3 Patents as a framework of innovation

To study firms’ sustainable AI innovation activity, I argue that patents are a highly
useful data source. Patents are exclusive rights over an invention and constitute
one of the most common forms of intellectual property protection (IPP) (Azzam,
2009). They allow innovators to prevent others from commercially using, producing,
or distributing their invention, usually for a limited time period (Pila, 2019, pp. 99-
101). To patent a technology, inventors must submit an application to a national
or international patent office, such as the European Patent Office (EPO), detailing
their invention and a set of claims, i.e., boundaries within which the technology is
protected (Pila, 2019, pp. 102-103).

It is important to note that there are some limitations to what can be patented,
especially for immaterial goods such as AI. In the jurisdiction of the EPO, AI is
patentable as long as it has a proven "technical character". In theory, this means
that inventions must have physical features or use some form of technical means.
However, this entails a very wide definition: a technical character can be proven by
simply applying an algorithm to some technological context, even if it is as general
as classifying image or audio data, or by solving a technical problem related to AI
(EPO, 2024a). Specifically when looking at AI in the context of sustainability, most
technologies in both pillars clearly fall under this criterion: In the field of AI for
Sustainability, AI is by definition applied to a specific context, for which it aims
to further sustainability. Within Sustainability of AI, solutions tend to incorporate
some form of technical implementation of an AI model which allows an algorithm
to become less environmentally damaging.

Notably, AI is not only theoretically patentable, research also suggests that technol-
ogy companies show immense interest in using patents to protect their inventions, for
at least three reasons. Firstly, large technology players strategically use intellectual
property rights to strengthen and preserve their innovation leadership. According
to Rikap (2023), tech companies create "Data-driven Intellectual Monopolies". This
phenomenon describes monopolistic market structures that are based on ownership
over knowledge: exclusive access to innovative AI systems combined with owner-

8

1084599

ship of data and computing infrastructure allows firms to benefit from the network
complementarities of controlling the entire AI value chain. A crucial aspect of main-
taining this control is to engage in continuous innovation to ensure intellectual lead-
ership and prevent potential competitors from catching up. In this system, patents
are a way of appropriating and gatekeeping research, including research which is
done in cooperation with academic institutions, and thus gaining exclusive access to
the most advanced AI systems. Microsoft exemplifies this business strategy. Over
the past 10 years, the company has engaged in continuous innovation across their
mobile and cloud business to preserve and expand their status as a data-driven in-
tellectual monopoly (Ibarra and Rattan, 2018). As a result, Microsoft has built
the second-largest AI patent portfolio in the world, only exceeded by IBM (WIPO,
2019).

With these growing power structures around knowledge, patenting becomes also a
protective strategy. Powerful companies’ aggressive patenting strategies create a
constant threat of patent disputes, potentially involving highly expensive litigation.
This forces especially smaller firms to also build up patent portfolios in order to
improve their negotiating position or to be able to credibly threaten a counterclaim
if necessary (Noel and Schankerman, 2013). It even makes it worthwhile for com-
panies to patent technologies if otherwise, it would not be. Patenting is expensive,
complex and time-consuming. Especially for fast-moving technological fields such
as AI, where independent discovery or reverse engineering by competitors is un-
likely, innovators may prefer more flexible forms of IPP. For instance, firms may
use trade secrecy (La Diega, 2018; Meyers, 2018) or forego protection altogether
and share software with the open-source community. But given this specific back-
ground, many AI developers follow a dual strategy where their code is open-sourced
and shared with the academic community while also being protected with a patent.
Open-sourcing their products allows companies to build a reputation and attract tal-
ent from top research institutions, while patent portfolios protect the firm (Calvin
and Leung, 2020; Hutson, 2023).

A third dimension contributing to the high relevance of patents in the context of
sustainable AI is the fact that, increasingly, AI is embedded in hardware products
and machinery. Particularly AI for Sustainability inventions such as the battery
and energy examples discussed above are often applied to technological fields which
are less fast-moving and where reverse engineering is indeed a problem (Bessen and
Hunt, 2007; Comino, Manenti, and Thumm, 2019). Naturally, these sectors are
much more interested in using patents as a protection mechanism. This is all the
more true since in recent years, the tangible entry barriers to many technology
markets have fallen. AI systems, in particular, can now be applied easily even
by firms with relatively little expertise, such that IPP becomes more important to
protect inventions (Gereffi, 2014).

Overall, this makes a strong case for the relevance of studying sustainable AI through
the lens of patents. Nonetheless, it must be acknowledged that patents do not cover
all relevant inventions. To the best of my knowledge, the share of non-patented AI
technologies is unknown. But as the arguments above show, patenting dynamics are
determined by strong and complex incentives, such that findings are likely not fully

9

1084599

generalisable to non-patented technologies.

2.4 Research questions

Following this argumentation, I empirically evaluate patents as a data source of
sustainable AI innovation. Patents contain a wide range of information about a
technology. For instance, extensive textual data describes the functionality and
application of an invention and bibliometric information details citations and con-
nections between patents (see Figure 2.2).

Figure 2.2: Example of a patent layout detailing the different elements of patent
publications (visualisation by Jiang and Goetz (2024))

I propose to specifically focus on textual elements in the patent data. So far, many
patent-based studies concentrate on the bibliometric data, analysing, for instance, a
patent’s novelty (Dahlin and Behrens, 2005) or forecasting technology developments
(Daim et al., 2006). Another strand of studies uses patent classification codes which
are assigned by patent offices and contain information about the type and tech-
nological domain of a patent. Papers in this branch include technological trend
analyses and patent valuation assessments (Jeon, Chae, and Gim, 2020; G.-C. Yang
et al., 2015). Both approaches, I argue, are somewhat limited in extracting use-
ful information about sustainable AI innovation. Bibliometric information can only
illuminate relationships between patents without focusing on content. While clas-
sification codes do contain information about a patent’s content, they are limited
in providing a comprehensive and unbiased overview. Since classification systems
are developed by human experts, they impose human judgements about which cat-
egories are relevant and how they relate to each other. This pre-determines which
types of innovations can be identified - if a category does not have a designated
code, it cannot be found. This is particularly problematic in fast-moving fields
like AI, where the classification systems may lack many new and significant cate-
gories and thus obscure important innovation patterns. Analysing textual data with
NLP techniques, instead, allows for a data-driven analysis, giving potentially more

10

1084599

comprehensive insights and reducing this bias. Since NLP techniques cover a wide
range of applications, including patent classification and content retrieval (Jiang and
Goetz, 2024), they provide a promising approach to the analysis of sustainable AI
patents. This informs my overarching research question (RQ):

RQ: Are patents, analysed using NLP techniques, a relevant element of
inquiry to improve our understanding of innovation within the field of
sustainable AI?

To answer this research question, I analyse five subquestions (SQ). Each one, I ar-
gue, illuminates a relevant element of sustainable AI innovation. Combined, they
will make evident whether and how a patent perspective enriches our understand-
ing of the field. The first subquestion concerns the balance between innovation in
AI for Sustainability and Sustainability of AI, the two pillars of sustainable AI.
While van Wynsberghe (2021) clarifies that both branches are valuable and nec-
essary components of achieving truly sustainable AI, this view is not mirrored in
the general discourse on AI. As discussed, AI is oftentimes strategically portrayed
as the (sole) solution to global challenges such as the climate crisis (Nachtwey and
Seidl, 2024). At the same time, the environmental degradation caused by AI tends
to be overlooked or underestimated (Saetra, 2023). This narrative could powerfully
impact innovation efforts and lead to large blindspots in the innovation landscape,
motivating the first subquestion:

SQ 1: How is innovation activity balanced between the fields of Sustain-
ability of AI and AI for Sustainability ?

A second essential aspect of enhancing our understanding of sustainable AI inno-
vation is to look at the two pillars individually, starting with AI for Sustainability.
As discussed earlier, inventions in this field apply AI systems to improve production
processes, products, and infrastructure. As Fan, Yan, and Wen (2023) find, these
applications come with different opportunities and challenges based on the industry
sector they are applied to. Analysing the innovation in AI for Sustainability by
sector and technology group can thus give valuable insights to guide and regulate
the use of AI for sustainability purposes in a constructive and effective way. This
informs the second subquestion:

SQ 2: How are inventions using AI for Sustainability clustered across
different sectors and technologies?

When analysing research progress in Sustainability of AI, it is common practice to
conceptualise innovation along the AI development process, i.e., organising inno-
vation by the experimentation, training and inference phases of AI models (Chien
et al., 2023; Patterson et al., 2021). When applying a patent lens, this conceptu-
alisation has limited applicability. After all, the same hardware implementations,
e.g., GPUs, can be used for all of these phases. Instead, I follow Wu et al. (2022) in
their framework of the areas of optimisation along the AI pipeline (see Figure 2.3).
According to this framework, the AI pipeline consists of data collection on the one
hand and AI operations on the other hand. Within the latter, optimisation can be
achieved by innovating

11

1084599

• platforms, i.e., frameworks or suite of tools providing the necessary software

infrastructure and interfaces for using AI models,

• models, i.e., specific model architectures,

• specialised AI hardware, for instance, hardware accelerators such as GPUs, or

• infrastructure,

i.e., components related to network connectivity, data and

model storage, and general hardware such as cooling or power supply.

Figure 2.3: Overview of areas of optimisation along the AI pipeline

Based on this conceptualisation, I study the following third subquestion:

SQ 3: How are inventions that improve the Sustainability of AI clustered
along the AI pipeline?

The fourth subquestion relates to the specific sustainability dimensions targeted by
innovations. For this, I only consider Sustainability of AI inventions, as these are
bound to target the specific environmental impacts of AI systems.1 Major impacts
suggested by the literature include energy consumption, water consumption, waste
and resource depletion, particularly rare metals which are crucial for many hardware
components (Ligozat et al., 2022). Since arguably, all impacts should be reduced to

1AI for Sustainability inventions, on the other hand, could contribute to sustainability in many
more ways, for instance by improving the performance of some inherently "sustainable" technology
(e.g., smart grids) or by predicting environmental and climate dynamics. The environmental impact
analysis here is highly complex, beyond the scope of this thesis.

12

1084599

make AI truly sustainable, environmental impact analysis can highlight important
fields of progress or neglect. This motivates the fourth subquestion:

SQ 4: Which environmental impacts of AI systems do inventions focusing
on the Sustainability of AI attempt to mitigate

Finally, looking at sustainable AI through the lens of patents allows me to analyse
major actors in the patent landscape. These are relevant in two ways. Firstly, with
innovation being a key lever of progress in sustainable AI, patents capture to what
extent large AI players and other companies show commitment to aligning AI with
sustainability. Secondly, patents reveal who owns inventions and thus who benefits
from this progress. With innovation being strategically used to expand market power
(see Sections 2.2 and 2.3), it is imperative to make transparent who has exclusive
access to knowledge.

SQ 5: Who are the major actors patenting solutions in sustainable AI?

Taken together, these five subquestions allow me to reveal whether and how patents
can serve as a relevant element of inquiry to improve our understanding of innovation
within the field of sustainable AI.

13

3 | Methodology

In the following, I present my data and methodology. After motivating European
patents as the focus of my thesis, I detail how sustainable AI patents were identified
and retrieved. I then outline my methodology, presenting a classifier to distinguish
between innovation in the two pillars of sustainable AI which is based on a new,
hand-labelled dataset, as well as two topic models used for content analysis.

3.1 European patents

I focus on patents published with the European Patent Office (EPO) for two main
reasons. Firstly, the majority of research in (Sustainable) AI focuses on the USA,
the largest AI market worldwide (Grand View Research, 2023). However, to gain
a thorough understanding of sector developments, it is crucial to study a variety of
regions. With AI spending projected to reach $66.4 billion in 2024, Europe captures
almost a quarter of the global AI market (Grand View Research, 2024b), making
it a highly relevant regional focus. Secondly, this thesis aims to generate policy-
informing insights necessary to establish sustainable AI. European institutions have
already demonstrated a strong interest in building regulatory frameworks for the
AI sector (Veale and Borgesius, 2021). Thus, my findings "fall on fertile ground",
making it more likely that they can contribute to shaping effective policies which may
serve as an example to other regions, including the US, where regulatory attention
remains highly fragmented.

How generalisable are findings obtained in Europe? First, it must be noted that firms
from all around the world can apply for European patents if they are interested
in exclusive ownership over their invention in the European jurisdiction. Thus,
my data cover inventions from a wide range of companies worldwide. Naturally,
however, the decision to apply for patents in a jurisdiction is guided by specific
incentives, such as the market size for a product. Also, not all companies have
the required resources to apply for international patents. Entire geographies such
as lower and middle income countries may be underrepresented such that European
data are likely not generalisable to the full international community. A second aspect
potentially limiting the external validity is that patent laws are country specific.
Subtle differences between the legislations may impact patterns in the patenting
activity, particularly for new and emerging fields such as AI (Pila, 2019). While
this project should therefore be considered a case study, European Patents remain
a highly interesting context.

3.2 Data

3.2.1 Patent identification

To identify innovation in sustainable AI, I selected patents that lie at the intersec-
tion between AI and environmental sustainability. This approach was proposed by

14

1084599

Verendel (2023) in their study on citation patterns of climate AI inventions and
successfully captures patents with relevant AI elements.

Patents which relate to AI or sustainability can be identified with "search strategies"
developed by major patent organisations. These strategies rely on the extensive clas-
sification systems used by patent offices to organise patents. One prominent system
is the Cooperative Patent Classification (CPC). Using designated codes, this sys-
tem categorises technologies into a detailed structure of over 200,000 groups. For
example, a patent for a new method of processing neural networks (publication num-
ber: EP3839831A1) is classified under "computing arrangements based on biological
models" (see Figure 3.1). A similar system is the International Patent Classification
(IPC). Both IPC and CPC codes were used in this study.

Figure 3.1: CPC classification scheme example

Specific codes determine whether a patent belongs to a particular technology group,
allowing for the selection of relevant patents. For both AI and sustainability, several
search strategies exist which have been shown yield different sets of relevant patents
(Favot et al., 2023). I thus combine multiple search strategies for a comprehensive
overview. Figure 3.2) presents the search strategies used for identifying AI and
sustainability patents.

Figure 3.2: Overview of search strategies for obtaining AI and sustainability patents

For detecting AI, I combined three strategies. Firstly, I used the approach provided
by the World Intellectual Property Organisation (WIPO), which is most prominent
in the literature. The organisation defines AI systems as "learning systems; that
is, machines that can become better at a task typically performed by humans with

15

1084599

limited or no human intervention"(WIPO, 2019, p. 19). To operationalise this in the
context of patents, the WIPO refers to the Association for Computing Machinery
(ACM) Computing Classification Scheme, which conceptualises AI as

• AI techniques, i.e., "advanced forms of statistical and mathematical models",

• AI functional applications, i.e., specific functions realized using AI techniques,

and

• AI application fields, i.e., larger areas where AI techniques and functional

applications can find application (WIPO, 2019, p. 25).

Patents that fall under this definition were detected using CPC and IPC codes, as
well as keywords. As the second and third strategy, I use the approaches provided
by Patentscope as well as the UK Intellectual Property Office (UK IPO). Both con-
stitute updated versions of the original WIPO strategy and use the same definition
of AI.123

For sustainability related technologies, I also combined three strategies. The first
group of sustainability patents was identified using the Y02 and Y04S classes in
the CPC scheme. These classes were included post-hoc to flag technologies that
"control, reduce or prevent greenhouse gas (GHG) emission of anthropogenic origin"
(Veefkind et al., 2012). The second group of patents was identified using the IPC
Green Inventory proposed by the WIPO in collaboration with the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) and the Intergovernmental
Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) (WIPO, 2010). Finally, the ENV-TECH search
strategy proposed by the OECD (Hascic and Migotto, 2015) was applied. All three
strategies were developed independently using expert commissions. Notably, no
definitions of sustainability or clear conceptual frameworks were published based on
which this was done (Favot et al., 2023; Veefkind et al., 2012).

Note, that defining patents as "sustainable" is subject to a critical limitation. Since
patents cannot account for the specific contexts within which patented technologies
will be produced and distributed, they offer limited information about the environ-
mental damages potentially connected to a technology. Thus, any "sustainability"
label of patents can only be an approximation, falling short of a comprehensive
assessment.

3.2.2 Patent retrieval

Based on the above identification strategies, I used PATSTAT (Figure 3.3), an online
patent database curated by the EPO (EPO, 2024b), to identify publication numbers
of relevant patents. Then, textual and bibliographic data were obtained from the

1WIPO:

https://www.wipo.int/export/sites/www/tech_trends/en/docs/techtrends_ai_

methodology.pdf, accessed 20.06.2024.

2Patentscope: https://www.wipo.int/tech_trends/en/artificial_intelligence/patentscope.html,

accessed 20.06.2024.

3UK

IPO:

https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/media/5d2dc787ed915d2fe1abfabe/

Artificial_Intelligence_-_A_worldwide_overview_of_AI_patents.pdf, accessed 20.06.2024.

16

EPO Open Patent Service via their API client. Assignee names and filing dates
were taken from Google Patents.4

1084599

Figure 3.3: Screenshot of Patstat database used for patent retrieval

With this approach, I identified 451,859 AI patents and 773,786 sustainability patents.
In the overlap and after deduplication (see Section 3.3.1 below), this resulted in a
dataset of 20,445 sustainable AI patents. Figure 3.4 displays these patents over
publication years. Notably, annual publication numbers rose substantially over the
study period, increasing more than 8-fold between 2000 and 2023.

3.3 Model pipeline

The patent analysis conducted in this thesis consists of two main parts. In the first
step, I build a patent classifier, finetuned to differentiating between patents relating
to AI for Sustainability and Sustainability of AI. In the second step, I use topic
modelling to analyse which technologies are patented in the two branches.

3.3.1 Data cleaning

Prior to implementing any models, several cleaning steps were undertaken as visu-
alised in Figure 3.5. First, patents, for which no English version of the abstract,
description or claims was available, were machine translated using Google Trans-
lator. Then, patents were thoroughly deduplicated, a step which is particularly

4EPO Open Patent Service API client:
bulk

patents:

data were

Google
bigquery?project=axial-gist-422710-c6&ws=!1m12!1m4!4m3!1spatents-public-data!
2spatents!3spublications_202310!1m6!12m5!1m3!1saxial-gist-422710-c6!2seurope-west2!
3scdd4d719-90e4-46af-b42e-48e6a1a1b60f!2e2 and missing patents were queried directly on
the website https://patents.google.com/, all accessed 20.06.2024.

obtained

https://pypi.org/project/python-epo-ops-client/,
from https://console.cloud.google.com/

17

1084599

Figure 3.4: Yearly sustainable AI patent publications between 2000 and 2023

important for NLP tasks where it has been shown to improve model performance
(Lee et al., 2022). For patents which share the publication number, country and
title, I kept only that patent in the dataset, which exhibits the most textual data
components (i.e., abstract, description and claims). This is assumed to maximise
the information contained about a patented technology.

As discussed above, patents were retrieved from several different data sources. Each
platform provides patents with titles, so each patent can have multiple titles that
may conflict with each other. To consolidate this, patents with conflicting informa-
tion were filtered and cross-checked manually. For 1,386 patents, titles from Google
and EPO showed some discrepancy. In these cases, the longer title was chosen, as-
suming that this would capture more information about the patent. Finally, all texts
were set to lower case and patent specific elements such as references to drawings
were removed. Since I used transformer models later in the analysis, no stopwords
were removed.

3.3.2 Hand labelling

To train a classifier that can differentiate between the two pillars of sustainable AI,
I required ground truth data. Notably, this study is the first to empirically anal-
yse sustainable AI conceptualised as consisting of two branches. Ergo, no labelled
datasets existed (yet) that could be used for this purpose. Instead, I manually la-
belled patents as concerning Sustainability of AI and/or AI for Sustainability.
I
used the following inclusion and exclusion criteria.

For technologies to be labelled as concerning the Sustainability of AI, they must re-
late to the AI pipeline as proposed by Wu et al. (2022). As discussed, this includes
technologies relating to data collection and AI operations, i.e., platforms, models,
specialised AI hardware and infrastructure. Patents concerning energy production
and grids were excluded. While more sustainable energy systems do contribute to re-
ducing the environmental impact of AI, such patents were considered not sufficiently
specific to AI. For technologies to be labelled as concerning AI for Sustainability,

18

1084599

Figure 3.5: Flowchart of data retrieval and cleaning

19

1084599

they must use AI to make another process more sustainable and/or provide infor-
mation necessary to achieve this.

Importantly, some technologies were labelled as concerning both classes. For in-
stance, automated power factor correction, a method for compensating for lagging
current, is an AI-related product that is used to improve the sustainability of data
centres (i.e., AI pipeline) and other products (Zhu et al., 2023). Similarly, some
patents were falsely included in the group of sustainable AI patents. For instance,
some patents related to brain surgery, potentially included via neural network re-
lated keywords. Such patents were labelled as belonging to neither class.

For the hand labelling, I adopted a three-stage process. First, a random sample of
500 patents was drawn. However, this resulted in an extreme under-representation
of patents in the Sustainability of AI class, with less than 20 sample patents. Since
a classifier can likely not extrapolate from such few samples to the wider group, I
secondly used keyword-searches to obtain more minority-class patents. For this, I
designed queries using keywords along the AI pipeline, aiming to capture Sustain-
ability of AI patents which are as broad and diverse as possible (see Appendix A
for keyword list). In this stage, an additional 200 patents were labelled. Despite the
careful design of keyword searches, this likely resulted in a biased training set, where
only specific types of Sustainability of AI inventions are included. Problematically,
the classifier may not be able to extrapolate to all types of patents in that class,
such that the performance on the training set may be misleadingly high compared
to the performance on all unlabelled data.

To circumvent this issue, I adopted an Active Learning (AL) approach as the third
stage. Designed for contexts where labelled data is scarce and costly to obtain, AL is
a method to strategically select those instances which would be most informative to
label. Thus, it aims to maximise the information value of the training set, enabling
the classifier to reach better performance on unseen data compared to random or
biased sampling (Tharwat and Schenck, 2023). AL has been tested specifically for
BERT-based models with highly promising results (Ein-Dor et al., 2020), making it
an excellent method for this study.

To implement AL, one first trains the classification model, on the small sample of
initially labelled instances. Here, I trained a baseline BERT model (see Section
3.3.4). Then, this model is used to predict classes for all unlabelled patents in the
dataset. To identify the most informative instances, I used the least confidence
strategy proposed by Lewis (1995). For each prediction, this method takes the
probability distribution over all possible classes and computes the entropy which
is a measure of uncertainty. It selects those predictions with the highest entropy
(i.e., the predictions where the model is least certain about the label) for manual
validation. In this third stage, 300 patents were labelled, resulting in a final training
dataset of 1000 patents. The label distribution in this training set is presented in
Table 3.1.

20

1084599

Patent Label

Training set Test set All labelled data

AI for Sustainability
Sustainability of AI
Both
None

Total

594
97
102
7

800

150
21
29
0

200

Table 3.1: Counts of patent labels

744
118
131
7

1,000

3.3.3 Label validation

Clustering the labelled patents using K-means showed that patents with the same
label are indeed clustered together, validating this strategy. The number of clusters
was checked using an elbow plot (Figure 3.6). Although there is not one clear elbow,
the plot indicates that two clusters fit well.

Elbow plot visualising the sum of squared distances between data points and their corresponding
cluster centroids for different values of K. The elbow method was used to determine the optimal
K in the K-means clustering of patent embeddings.

Figure 3.6: Elbow plot for K-means clustering

Figure 3.7 shows a Uniform Manifold Approximation and Projection (UMAP) (McInnes,
Healy, and Melville, 2020) visualisation of the clustering. To check how well the
projection preserves the data structure, I calculated trustworthiness. This metric
expresses how much of the original rank order of data points’ K nearest neighbours is
preserved in the low-dimensional space (Stasis, Stables, and Hockman, 2016). With
scores of above 0.9 for up to K=50 nearest neighbours, the projection is indicated
to be a good representation of the original dataset.

21

1084599

UMAP visualisation of K-means Clustering of labelled patents.

Figure 3.7: Clustering of labelled patents

22

1084599

The cluster centres neatly align with the two sustainable AI pillars. Notably,
Sustainability of AI patents are much more condensed than AI for Sustainability
patents. This, however, makes sense given that the former are focused on technolo-
gies relating to the AI pipeline only, while the latter apply AI to a wide range of
different contexts, explaining the wider spread. Patents concerning both classes are
mostly grouped along the diagonal, speaking to the idea that while these patents
are spread more widely than just the AI pipeline, they still capture only a limited
set of the technological contexts present in the dataset.

3.3.4 Classifier architectures

Conceptually, the two classes AI for Sustainability and Sustainability of AI are
neither mutually exclusive nor collectively exhaustive. While some patents use AI
to contribute both to the sustainability of AI itself as well as to the sustainability
of other processes, others belong to neither class. Given this problem structure, I
constructed a multilabel classifier. This architecture provides an individual label for
each possible class, thus allowing for patents to belong to either one, both or neither
category.

I trained a range of classifier architectures before selecting the best performing model
to predict labels for all patents in the dataset. I used a 80/20 train-test split on
the 1000 labelled patents, resulting in 800 observations available for training. Given
this limited training data set, I applied k-fold cross-validation where I randomly
split the data into k=5 subsamples. In each fold, I trained the model on 4 samples
and validated on the remaining one which was alternated in each run. Thus, the
choice of validation holdout did not influence the model performance, making K-
fold cross-validation a robust approach, particularly suited for sparse labelled data
(James et al., 2017).

While the labelled data are imbalanced, no upsampling or reweighting was used.
In multi-label problems, these strategies tend to result in oversampling of common
labels and thus introduce bias (Huang et al., 2021). However, to prevent different
class distributions across train and test splits as well as across validation folds,
which may impact classifier performance, stratified sampling was used. This method
divides the dataset into strata according to the class assignment and then selects
data points from each strata such that the class distribution is equal for each sample
(i.e., test and train sample as well as each fold in the cross validation) (Neyman,
1992). To identify the best performing model, all architectures were trained and
validated on the training dataset while the best performing model was also tested
on the test set.

3.3.4.1 Model architectures

A range of different classifier architectures were computed. Firstly, I trained clas-
sifiers based on four different transformer models. These models were chosen due
to promising results reported in recent patent classification studies (Craswell et al.,
2020). Transformers are based on a neural network architecture which uses self-
attention mechanisms to process input data in parallel. This allows the models to

23

1084599

capture words’ contextual meanings including long-term dependencies across text-
sequences (Vaswani et al., 2017).

BERT: As a baseline, I used a BERT (Bidirectional Encoder Representations from
Transformers) model (Devlin et al., 2019). This model was chosen since it is one
of the most influential transformer models and has achieved state-of-the-art results
across a range of NLP tasks (Koroteev, 2021). It represents text using both left and
right context and was pretrained on masked language modelling and next-sentence
prediction using data from the BooksCorpus and English Wikipedia (Devlin et al.,
2019).

SciBERT: Secondly, I applied a SciBERT model (Beltagy, Lo, and Cohan, 2019).
Based on the BERT architecture, SciBERT was trained on a corpus of 1.14 mil-
lion full scientific papers. This domain-specific training may allow the model to
understand the terminology and structure of scientific and technical documents,
e.g., patents, more effectively than general-purpose models such as Bert. Especially
since 18% of the sample comprises research from computer science, SciBERT is a
promising model basis for classifying AI patents.

PatentSBERTa: Thirdly, I used PatentSBERTa (Bekamiri, Hain, and Jurowetzki,
2021). Based on Sentence-BERT (SBERT) and RoBERTa, the model is fine-tuned
with supervised in-domain data from US patent claims. Potentially even more than
SciBERT, this approach allows the model to capture the particularities unique to
patents, including the technical jargon used in the texts.
Initially proposed for
classifying patents into CPC codes, this model is particularly fit for the purpose at
hand due to the large database of patents on which it is trained.

For this study, all above models were finetuned to my specific classification task
using an AutomodelForSequenceClassification structure.5 As input data, I used
the patent title, abstract and the first 300 words of the description if available.
Patent titles tend to be very short and generic, so also considering the abstract and
description can add valuable information. Since patent descriptions usually start
with a description of the background and problem which a patent is aiming to solve
(see also Figure 2.2 in Section 2.4), the initial 300 words are likely highly informative
of the patent domain. On average, the input data consists of 423 words, which are
well captured by the 512 input tokens of BERT based models (Devlin et al., 2019).
Even among patents which have a description, the average length is 511 words and
thus below the maximum token length.

In the hyperparameter tuning, different batch sizes as well as dropout rates and lay-
ers were tested in a grid search. As an optimizer, I used AdamW with a learning rate
of 5−5. All other hyperparameters were set to default. As is common for multilabel
problems, a binary cross entropy loss function with logits loss (BCEWithLogitsLoss)
was used, which applies a sigmoid layer to the classifier resulting in binary classi-
fication predictions. Compared to a separate sigmoid function followed by a plain
binary cross entropy (BCE) loss function, BCEWithLogitsLoss has been shown to
provide higher numerical stability (Qiu et al., 2023).

5https://huggingface.co/transformers/v3.0.2/model_doc/auto.html, accessed 15.07.2024.

24

1084599

Longformer: While the models discussed above have shown promising results on
different classification tasks, several scholars contend that BERT-based models are
not well suited for patent analysis as they cannot capture the full length of patent
documents (Jiang and Goetz, 2024). To be able to take more text data into account
in the classification algorithm, I therefore also applied a Longformer model (Beltagy,
Peters, and Cohan, 2020). By leveraging a local windowed attention combined with
task motivated global attention which is able to scale linearly with sequence length,
this model can process documents of up to 4096 tokens, a significant advancement
compared to the 512 maximum token length of BERT models. Longformer is per-
tained on masked language modelling and shows state of the art results across a
number of tasks. In the study, I applied an open sourced LongformerForMultiL-
abelSequenceClassification algorithm.6

For the Longformer model, I used the patent title, abstract, claims and the first
3000 words of the description if available. Across all patents, this leads to an aver-
age document length of 3154 words. When only counting patents exhibiting both a
description and claims, the average length is 4022 words, i.e., still below the max-
imum token length of Longformer models. To mitigate memory constraints, the
batchsize was set to 4 and gradient accumulation with 4 accumulation steps was ap-
plied. This technique accumulates gradients for several batches instead of updating
the model weights after every batch, thereby effectively imitating a larger batchsize
(here 16) while keeping peak memory usage low (Sun, 2019). Again, the AdamW
optimizer and BCEWithLogitsLoss were used while all other hyperparameters are
set to default.

3.3.4.2 Loss functions

Secondly, I trained these four model architectures with different loss functions. In
their baseline version, models were trained with BCEWithLogitsLoss. However, re-
search indicates that due to the imbalanced class distribution, balancing loss func-
tions may improve performance. The main idea is to re-weight the BCE loss function
to give more attention to rare instance-label pairs. In their comparative study of
different functions in the context of text classification, Huang et al. (2021) find that
distribution balanced loss (DB) and class balanced focal loss with negative toler-
ant regularisation (CB-NTR) show the best performance across a range of datasets.
Following this recommendation, I compared these two loss functions along with the
traditional binary cross entropy loss function.7

3.3.4.3 Multimodal input data

Thirdly, I trained the four model architectures with different input data. The base-
line models were trained only using textual data from the patent title, abstract
and description (and claims for Longformer). As discussed, the combination of text

6https://github.com/jlealtru/website_tutorials/blob/main/notebooks/Multi_label_

classification_longformer_tutorial.ipynb, accessed 15.07.2024.

7The code was used as provided by the paper https://github.com/Roche/BalancedLossNLP,

accessed 15.07.2024.

25

1084599

components is necessary to capture detailed information about a patent. However, I
also trained the classifiers on a combination of textual data and CPC codes. While,
as discussed, the codes by themselves may obscure important innovation patterns,
they do hold relevant information about patent type and domain. When combined
with textual data, they may boost performance for the classification task. For this,
I concatenated the document embeddings with a binarised matrix of the CPC codes
before passing this information into the drop-out, batch normalisation and fully
connected layers.

3.3.5 Model evaluation

For evaluation, I used the macro F1 score. This multilabel extension to the tradi-
tional F1 score, i.e., the harmonic mean of precision and recall, takes the unweighted
average of F1 scores across classes. Since the dataset is imbalanced but all classes
are equally important to the analysis, this metric is highly suited for the analysis
(Banerjee et al., 2019). For all models, average performance across the validation
folds is reported. In addition, I report the performance of the best model on the
test data.

3.3.5.1 Overview of classifier architectures

Figure 3.8 presents an overview over all tested classifier architectures. Excluding
hyperparameter tuning, the variations described above result in 24 overarching clas-
sifiers (4 models x 3 loss functions x 2 input data types). All models were trained
with 5-fold cross validation on 5 epochs to prevent overfitting. Each of the Bert-
based models was trained on two batch-sizes (16 and 32) and four drop-out layer
constellations. For the Longformer models, computational costs were much higher
such that no hyperparameter tuning was conducted. Including hyperparameter tun-
ing, 222 models were trained.

To obtain final predictions on unlabelled data, the best performing model was again
trained on all available labelled instances and then used to predict classes of unla-
belled data.

3.4 Content analysis

After identifying the best-performing classifier, and predicting labels for all instances
in the dataset, I used topic modelling to analyse patent contents. Traditionally, topic
modelling methods such as Latent Dirichlet Allocation were based on bag-of-words
representations of documents which disregard any semantic relationships between
words. However, with the emergence of advanced embedding models such as BERT,
new approaches have been proposed, including BERTopic (Grootendorst, 2022).
This model produces state-of-the-art results in topic extraction tasks, making it an
ideal choice for this thesis. BERTopic takes document embeddings as inputs, reduces
their dimensionality, and then uses HDBSCAN to cluster them based on their prox-
imity in the vector space. This results in clusters of semantically similar documents,
i.e., "topics". To generate embeddings, the sentence-transformer implementation of

26

1084599

Figure 3.8: Overview of classifier architectures

Specter (Cohan et al., 2020) was used.8 Built on SciBERT, this model is specifically
trained on citation data to model inter-document relationships. This tends to result
in more compact topic clusters in the embedding space, motivating my choice. Since
Specter is a transformer-based model, no pre-processing (e.g., stopword removal) is
required.

3.4.1 AI for Sustainability

To analyse AI for Sustainability patents by sector, I first identified topics with
BERTopic. Then, a Llama 3 model was used to provide concise topic labels and de-
scriptions. Launched by Meta in 2023, the open-source Llama model series (Touvron
et al., 2023) is a family of auto-regressive LLMs using the Transformer architecture.
The Llama 3 models, released on April 18, 2024, achieve state-of-the-art performance
across a variety of NLP tasks, outperforming many closed-source LLMs including
GPT-3. In this study, the 8 billion parameter version of the instructor model is used
(aptha/Meta-Llama-3-8B-Instruct-Q4_0-GGUF).9 Due to the large size, the model
was quantized to 4-bit using the transformers bitsandbytes implementation.10 Top-
ics were then reviewed and manually clustered into technology groups and sectors.

8https://huggingface.co/sentence-transformers/allenai-specter, accessed 15.07.2024.
9https://huggingface.co/aptha/Meta-Llama-3-8B-Instruct-Q4_0-GGUF, accessed 15.07.2024.
10https://huggingface.co/docs/transformers/main/en/quantization/bitsandbytes,
accessed

15.07.2024.

27

1084599

3.4.2 Sustainability of AI

To analyse Sustainability of AI innovation along the AI pipeline, BERTopic was
used in a zero-shot setting. This technique allows users to find predefined topics
in a dataset making it perfectly suited for cases such as here, where a specific con-
ceptualisation of topical clusters is of interest (i.e., innovation along the AI pipeline
as conceptualised by Wu et al. (2022)). In practice, the model embeds pre-defined
topic descriptions and compares document embeddings using cosine similarity. The
zero-shot topic descriptions used here are listed in Appendix B. To validate the topic
model, 20 patents out of each cluster were manually reviewed. This process showed
that the clusters produced by the model contained highly relevant patents, speaking
for the validity of the approach.

3.4.3 Environmental impact

In the next step, I analysed the environmental impacts targeted in Sustainability
of AI patents. Since patents concentrate on presenting the detailed workings of an
invention, the environmental impact improvements promised by a technology are
often mentioned only briefly. Accordingly, applying a topic model to this task re-
sulted in no meaningful clustering of the patents. Instead, a keyword search was
used. While rather simplistic, this methodology is a straight-forward and widely
used approach to identify whether a specific issue is discussed in a document, even
if mentioned only briefly. The four main environmental impacts of AI suggested by
the literature relate to energy consumption, water consumption, waste and resource
depletion, particularly rare metals which are crucial for many hardware components
(Ligozat et al., 2022). For each impact category, a list of keywords was curated to
capture relevant patents (see Appendix C). Patents can fall under several categories
and those which do not fall under any category were counted as "other". Impor-
tantly, for this analysis only those patents were considered for which a description
was available. This is because the patent title and abstract tend to only focus on
the technical functioning of an invention. The description also includes details on
the problem an invention aims to solve, making it likely that information about the
environmental impact focus of a patent is contained there. Note, however, that this
reduces the number of patents in the analysis, as not all for all patents in the dataset
a description was available.

3.5 Actor identification

To analyse which actors most commonly patent sustainable AI technologies, I finally
investigated assignees based the number of patents they hold. Patent assignees
are the legal owners of a patent, i.e., the actor who has exclusive ownership over
the patented technology (Azzam, 2009). Additionally, I analysed the geographic
distribution of actors by calculating patent numbers by the country of residence of
the assignee.

28

4 | Results

In the following, I will present my results. First, I review the performance of dif-
ferent classifier architectures designed to distinguish between innovation in AI for
Sustainability and Sustainability of AI and identify the best performing model. This
provides the basis for the subsequent content analysis, where I will investigate each
subquestion to unveil whether patents, analysed using NLP methods, constitute a
relevant element of inquiry to improve our understanding of innovation within of
sustainable AI.

4.1 Classification results

Table 4.1 summarises the performance of all 24 classifier architectures.

Model

Input Data

Loss Function Macro F1 Accuracy
(Val avg)

(Val avg)

BERT

SciBERT

PatentSBERTa

TAD

TAD + CPC

TAD

TAD + CPC

TAD

TAD + CPC

TADC

Longformer

TADC + CPC

BCE
DB
CB-NTR

BCE
DB
CB-NTR

BCE
DB
CB-NTR

BCE
DB
CB-NTR

BCE
DB
CB-NTR

BCE
DB
CB-NTR

BCE
DB
CB-NTR

BCE
DB
CB-NTR

0.861
0.840
0.841

0.834
0.845
0.841

0.871
0.856
0.849

0.844
0.841
0.858

0.874
0.866
0.836

0.831
0.828
0.848

0.786
0.786
0.823

0.754
0.795
0.809

0.844
0.835
0.859

0.862
0.850
0.861

0.860
0.845
0.870

0.863
0.862
0.881

0.851
0.841
0.871

0.825
0.849
0.862

0.460
0.460
0.857

0.731
0.704
0.832

Abbreviations: TADC - title, abstract, description, claims; CPC - CPC codes; BCE - binary
cross entropy loss; DB - distributed loss; CB-NTR - class balanced focal loss with negative
tolerant regularisation
Three decimal places are shown to expose marginal differences. Best result per transformer
model in bold, overall best result in green.

Table 4.1: Classifier performance

The best performing model uses SciBERT and multimodal input data with a CB-
NTR loss function. In the cross validation, this model reaches an average macro-F1
score of 88.1% and an average accuracy of 85.8%. On the test set, the model reaches
a macro-F1 score of 86.4% and an accuracy of 84.5%. The slight difference in scores

29

1084599

is likely due to statistical fluctuations: Across the five folds of the cross-validation,
the macro-F1 score ranges between 86.6% and 91.6%, indicating that the test set
performance may also fall within 2-4 percentage points around the average.

Figure 4.1 displays the confusion matrix of true and predicted labels in the test set.
The model performs well in identifying AI for Sustainability patents with a sensi-
tivity (true positive rate) of 89.3%. With 66.7%, the sensitivity for Sustainability of
AI patents is slightly lower. However, in both cases, most misclassified patents were
predicted to belong to both classes. Thus the model at least partially recognised
the correct class. Patents that actually belong to both classes were identified with
a sensitivity of 62.1%. Here, all incorrect predictions were classified to concern only
one instead of both branches, thus still partially recognising the correct class. The
test set contains no patents that belong to neither class.

Confusion matrix of true and predicted labels of the best performing model (SciBERT with
multimodal input data and a CB-NTR loss function) on the test set.

Figure 4.1: Confusion matrix of true and predicted labels on the test set for best
performing model

To most effectively predict labels for unseen patents in the dataset and analyse
the subquestions, the best performing model was trained once more using all 1000

30

1084599

labelled instances.

4.2 SQ 1: Balance in innovation activity

In the content analysis, I first assess how innovation activity is balanced between the
fields of Sustainability of AI and AI for Sustainability. Applied to the full dataset
of 20,445 patents, the classifier predicts 17,302 patents (84.6%) to belong to the
category "AI for Sustainability" and 548 patents (2.7%) to belong to "Sustainability
of AI". 95 (0.5%) are predicted to belong to neither and 2,500 patents (12.2%) are
predicted to belong to both classes (see Figure 4.2). This means that more than
97% of inventions relate to AI for Sustainability, while less than 15% relate to the
Sustainability of AI. This extreme imbalance in innovation activity is noteworthy
and indicates that, in line with the wider discourse, applying AI is much more
popular than working on reducing its environmental impact.

Predicted labels of the best performing model (SciBERT with multimodal input data and a
CB-NTR loss function) on the full dataset.

Figure 4.2: Predicted labels for full dataset

4.3 SQ 2: AI for Sustainability innovation

Next, I analyse how AI for Sustainability innovation is clustered across different
sectors and technologies. For this, I consider all patents classified as concerning

31

1084599

Sunburst chart of AI for Sustainability clusters organised by sector. Clusters were obtained using
a BERTopic model and were manually organised into sector groups.

Figure 4.3: AI for Sustainability innovation by sector and technology

32

1084599

either only AI for Sustainability or both classes. Figure 4.3 displays a sunburst chart
visualising the clusters identified with the topic model. The clusters were manually
organised into a hierarchical structure, where the inner circle of the sunburst chart
represents sectors, the middle circle shows technology groups and the outer circle
includes specific technologies.

Overall, it is notable how widely the applications are spread, spanning six different
sectors: energy, mobility, electronics, information and communication technology
(ICT), production/manufacturing and environment. Most commonly, AI is applied
in the context of sustainability in the energy sector (30.1% of patents). Within this
sector, AI is applied to power conversion on the one hand. This group captures tech-
nologies for power transfer, voltage regulation, and Electric Vehicle (EV) charging.
On the other hand, AI is used for different types of energy production, including
wind, solar, thermal, gas and nuclear energy, as well as fuel cells. This speaks to the
idea that diverse opportunities arise for sustainable AI applications in the energy
sector, potentially motivating closer attention from policy and funding.

The second largest sector is mobility (20.9% of patents). This sector uses AI mostly
to make automotive technologies more sustainable, for instance through vehicle
transmission systems, such as designs for gear pairs, clutches and selective engage-
ment mechanisms to improve vehicle efficiency. Within electronics, the third-largest
sector (20.2%), AI applications focus mainly on batteries including battery design,
charging and monitoring, and on lighting. Fourthly, AI is used to improve environ-
mental sustainability in ICT (12.5% of patents). Here, AI is mostly used in sen-
sor technologies, wireless communication systems, mobile devices and touchscreen
design. Within production and manufacturing (8.7%), the fifth largest sector, sus-
tainable AI innovation has two main pillars: smart production systems, where data
analysis is used to optimise manufacturing processes, as well as hybrid production
methods, where 3D printing and subtractive processes (e.g., grinding or drilling) are
combined in the same machines to improve efficiency in the fabrication of products.
Finally, AI is also applied to specifically environment-related technologies (7.6%).
For instance, it finds application in waste treatment, air filtering, carbon capture
and removal as well as agriculture (e.g., hydroponics).

4.4 SQ 3: Sustainability of AI innovation

Next, I analyse how Sustainability of AI innovation is clustered along the AI pipeline.
I start with an analysis of those patents which only concern Sustainability of AI but
not both classes. This is because many more patents relate to both rather than just
the one class such that a wider view may obscure more fine-grained patterns.

Generally, with only 548 patents focusing exclusively on the Sustainability of AI,
the entire pipeline attracts very little patenting activity. Figure 4.4 displays how
innovation is clustered across the AI pipeline. This shows in even more detail,
how patenting numbers in the field are extremely low. In the high-level overview,
innovation shows a strong focus on AI operations (473 or 86.3% of patents) over
data collection technologies such as sensors and tracking devices (75 or 13.7%).

33

1084599

Innovation clusters obtained using a zero-shot BERTopic model. Clusters were aligned along the
AI pipeline, with zoom-ins to detail distributions. a) to d) present example patents for each AI
operation.

Figure 4.4: Overview of Sustainability of AI innovation clusters along the AI pipeline
(Sustainability of AI only)

Within AI operations, the smallest cluster relates to AI platform technology, com-
prising 6.1% or 27 patents. Platforms are frameworks providing the necessary soft-
ware infrastructure and interfaces for using AI models and can span across the entire
workflow, from data preparation to model design and training. An example patent
of this cluster (publication number: EP4127908A1) proposes a processing system
that uses a compiler to automatically identify and replace source code with high-
performance tensor operations executable by a specialised hardware accelerator (e.g.,
a GPU). Thus, it integrates the optimisation of code execution on a platform-level,
facilitating sustainable computing for users.

The next largest cluster comprises specific AI model architectures. This cluster in-

34

1084599

cludes 13.6% of operations patents, with a total of 64 patents. For instance, one
patent (publication number: EP3612937A1) proposes a neural network architecture
with dynamic sequencing of data partitions. This prioritizes fully processing one
layer of the network before moving on to the next layer while being able to adapt
dynamically based on memory availability, thus improving memory utilisation and
performance. Thirdly, 167 operations patents (35.3%) relate to specialised AI hard-
ware. For instance, one patent (publication number: EP3612937A1) proposes a
technology that uses entropy as an efficient hardware implementation method for
ant colony optimization for designing circuits.

The largest group of operations patents (45.0% or 213 patents) relate to general
AI infrastructure. Within AI infrastructure, technologies can be further clustered
in network connectivity (11.7%), storage (31.5%) and general hardware (56.8%),
with the latter including for instance power supply and conversion as well as cooling
systems needed for efficient and reliable computing. An example patent (publication
number: EP3823245A1) relating to network technology proposes a switch circuitry,
a hardware component which manages the data traffic between different devices in
a network.

Innovation clusters obtained using a zero-shot BERTopic model. Clusters were aligned along the
AI pipeline, with zoom-ins to detail distributions.

Figure 4.5: Overview of Sustainability of AI innovation clusters along the AI pipeline
(wider definition)

When considering the wider definition of Sustainability of AI patents, i.e., also
those patents which at the same time relate to AI for Sustainability, the proportions
change drastically with the vast majority of patents relating to general hardware
infrastructure (see Figure 4.5). This is intuitive: technologies in the overlap concern
for instance electronic components which can be used across a variety of contexts

35

1084599

including but not limited to AI.

4.5 SQ 4: Environmental focus of Sustainability of

AI inventions

In the next step, I analyse which environmental impact dimensions are the focus of
Sustainability of AI inventions. Figure 4.6 displays the distribution of patents by
environmental focus. As discussed earlier, this analysis includes only those patents
where a patent description was available, explaining the lower overall patent counts.

Treemap plot of Sustainability of AI patents by environmental impact focus. Patents are
included if words related to a type of environmental impact are mentioned in abstract or
conclusion. Patents can be included in several categories and publications without description are
excluded. On the left, patents only falling into the Sustainability of AI class are presented. On
the right, patents falling into both categories are included.

Figure 4.6: Sustainability of AI patents by environmental impact focus

Both when considering only Sustainability of AI specific patents as well as when
including patents falling under both classes, the vast majority of inventions focus
on reducing energy consumption (63% and 62%). Within the former group, waste
is the second largest environmental impact focus, with 13% of patents relating to
reducing waste or toxicity, for instance by improving product lifespan. Only 6%
of patents focus on reducing the consumption of rare metals and only one patent
discusses the reduction of water consumption. Within the wider Sustainability of
AI definition, the focus on rare metals is more prevalent than waste, pointing to the
idea that many of the general AI infrastructure inventions improve on the usage of
rare metals. Again, water is by far the smallest focus area, with 4 patents focusing
on this impact factor.

36

1084599

4.6 SQ 5: Major actors in sustainable AI patenting

Finally, I investigate the major actors patenting solutions in sustainable AI. Figure
4.7 shows the top 20 patent assignees in sustainable AI.

On the left, top assignees by number of patents are displayed. On the right, assignees are
clustered by sector focus.

Figure 4.7: Top 20 patent assignees in sustainable AI

The market is highly fragmented. The top assignee Siemens holds less than 3%
Interestingly, the top assignees do not include typical AI
of patents in the field.
companies. Instead, most of the companies operate in industrial engineering (mostly
automotive) or electronics. Two players produce semi-conductors and one firm is
in renewable energy. Analysing assignees by country reveals that the largest share
of European sustainable AI patents, i.e., 4,000 patents or 19.6%, are held by US
American firms (see Figure 4.8). With ca. 3,000 patents each, Germany and Japan
are the second and third largest sustainable AI patent holders. Interestingly, when
looking at the top five countries, only one European country is included, while three
Asian countries are (Japan, China, Korea).

4.7 Patents as a framework of sustainable AI inno-

vation

These analyses illustrate how patents, when analysed using NLP, can illuminate
large-scale innovation patterns, specific inventions and important actors. These
relevant insights indicate that patents do indeed provide a relevant element of inquiry
to improve our understanding of innovation within the field of sustainable AI.

37

1084599

Figure 4.8: Sustainability of AI patents by country

38

5 | Discussion

5.1 Principal findings

This thesis has investigated patents as a data source and framework for innovation
analysis in sustainable AI. I find that NLP-based patent analysis can contribute
immensely to a profound understanding of innovation in this area by illuminating
patterns in innovation activity, content, and actors. Using a text-based classifier, I
reveal that innovation activity in AI for Sustainability hugely outweighs Sustainabil-
ity of AI. Within the former, research is largely focused on the energy, mobility and
electronics sectors. Within the latter, innovation shows a strong focus on specialised
AI hardware and AI infrastructure. Notably, Sustainability of AI patents mostly
tackle the energy consumption of AI systems, while other environmental impacts
such as water consumption remain highly understudied. Finally, I find that the sus-
tainable AI patent landscape is highly fragmented, with most assignees being based
in the US, Germany and Japan. Interestingly, the most prominent AI players do not
emerge as major actors within sustainability. These results powerfully illustrate that
patents constitute a highly relevant element of inquiry which substantially improves
our understanding of innovation in sustainable AI.

5.2 Patent classifier

Before interpreting my results, I will briefly discuss the sustainable AI classifier which
provides the methodological foundation of this study. As anticipated, both using an
alternative loss function as well as including multimodal input data improved the
classifier performance. However, the superior performance of the SciBERT model ar-
chitecture is noteworthy. Despite PatentSBERTa’s finetuning on patent data and the
Longformer model’s capability to process more text, SciBERT, which was finetuned
on general scientific literature, emerged as the best model. A possible explanation
is that SciBERT was extensively trained on computer science literature. Since the
sustainable AI patents considered here closely relate to this field, the model may be
particularly fit for the task. Another reason may be that PatentSBERTa is trained
on US instead of European patents which may differ systematically, explaining the
lower performance.

The top-performing model excels in correctly identifying AI for Sustainability patents,
but performs slightly less well for Sustainability of AI patents or patents classified
under both classes. This may be due to the imbalanced label distribution, where
the classifier was exposed to a significantly larger number of AI for Sustainability
patents compared to the other two categories. Nonetheless, the overall performance
is very high, especially compared to other AI-related patent classification studies.
There, common F1 score levels range between 0.4 and 0.6 (Giczy, Pairolero, and
Toole, 2022; S. Li et al., 2018) which is much lower than the 0.88 achieved by
my best-performing model. This allows for high confidence in the classifier as the
foundation of this study.

39

1084599

5.3 Contextualisation in the wider literature

I now interpret my findings which provide pioneering insights into innovation pat-
terns in sustainable AI.

5.3.1 SQ 1: Balance in innovation activity

The first main insight revealed in this study is that there is an extreme imbalance
between innovation activity in the fields of AI for sustainability and Sustainability
of AI. More than 97% of inventions pertain to the former while less than 15%
address the latter.1 This disparity is deeply worrying, given that both dimensions
are valuable and necessary components of establishing sustainable AI. The limited
attention on the Sustainability of AI is particularly alarming as the AI market and
therefore its environmental impact continues to grow (Bashir et al., 2024; Grand
View Research, 2024a). Limiting these damages should be a top priority.

To actually prioritise the Sustainability of AI, it is imperative first to acknowledge
the harm incurred by AI systems. As discussed, large AI companies, industry and
political experts, often portray AI as the (sole) solution to global challenges. How-
ever, this narrative obscures the immense environmental costs of these technologies,
hindering the effective alignment of AI with sustainability. To counter these mis-
leading perceptions of AI, educational efforts and realistic reporting are essential.
Secondly, effective policies must be implemented to incentivise green AI innovation.
For instance, this could be achieved by conditioning R%D funding for AI research
on efforts such as the usage of renewable electricity or the development of energy
efficient equipment (Cowls et al., 2021, p. 302).

5.3.2 SQ 2: AI for Sustainability innovation

Analysing AI for Sustainability patents individually showed that AI models are
applied to a variety of sectors and technologies. Cowls et al. (2021) argue, that
this should be considered a positive dynamic: climate change comes with a host of
challenges and damages, many of which are extremely severe. This offers a wide
array of options to use AI for good and harness it to its full potential. With the
largest cluster of AI for Sustainability patents focusing on the energy sector, it also
appears that innovators are working on one of the most powerful levers. Energy
supply (electricity and heat production) causes almost 50% of all European CO2
emissions (International Energy Agency, 2021). Using AI to integrate renewable
sources or to forecast supply and demand for optimal energy distribution (Serban
and Lytras, 2020) is thus an important step towards more sustainable societies.

While innovation in AI for Sustainability therefore gives rise to hope, it is crucial to
not that applying AI with the aim of furthering sustainability does not guarantee
a positive outcome. Due to high computational costs, some AI applications may
create more harm than they mitigate. To avoid this, it is imperative to establish

1Note that these numbers do not add up to 100% because 12% of inventions relate to both

fields.

40

1084599

consistent measurement and reporting standards for the environmental impacts of
algorithms (Cowls et al., 2021; Henderson et al., 2020; Lacoste et al., 2019; Ligozat
et al., 2022). Patents could play an important role in this. If inventors were required
to detail and quantify how a technology enhances sustainability while considering
its environmental costs, this could expose potentially harmful projects and provide
an incentive to develop better products.

5.3.3 SQ 3: Sustainability of AI innovation

Analysing patents along the AI pipeline revealed that innovation focuses on AI
operations rather than data collection, with significant efforts on specialised AI
hardware and infrastructure innovation. While, as discussed, it is obvious that all
of these areas are highly understudied, it remains unclear whether the distribution
of innovation efforts, too, needs steering. One study on AI operations at Meta
suggests that iterative optimisations across different optimisation areas can result
in substantial power emission reductions, indicating the a wide spread of innovation
is favourable (Wu et al., 2022). However, more robust insights are needed detailing
which optimisation areas may hold the most potential for reducing the environmental
impacts of AI systems. For this, it is necessary to go beyond studying separate
elements of the pipeline, e.g., specific model architectures and their carbon footprints
(Chien et al., 2023; Naidu et al., 2021; Patterson et al., 2021; Verdecchia et al., 2022),
and compare different elements in their capacity to improve sustainability. This will
allow practitioners and policymakers to optimally choose which problems to work
on and thereby accelerate the journey to more sustainable AI systems.

5.3.4 SQ 4: Environmental focus of Sustainability of AI in-

ventions

When examining the environmental impacts targeted by Sustainability of AI inno-
vation, it stands out that most patents focus on improving the energy consumption
of AI systems. Crucially, making systems more energy efficient is a key lever to lim-
iting the carbon emissions of the sector and combating the climate crisis (Shenoy,
2023). However, to ensure that efficiency gains actually translate into lower overall
emissions, policy intervention is needed. This is because, paradoxically, improving
the efficiency of AI could actually increase the overall AI carbon footprint. Known
as Jevon’s paradox, resource efficiency can function as a stimulus, incentivising the
creation of additional novel AI use cases (Nishant, Kennedy, and Corbett, 2020;
Widdicks et al., 2023). To avoid this trap, macroeconomic studies point to the im-
portance of environmental policy interventions such as taxation or cap-and-trade
systems (Freire-Gonzalez, 2021; Mashhadi Rajabi, 2022; Widdicks et al., 2023).

While a considerable number of patents focus on the energy consumption of AI sys-
tems, other environmental impacts remain neglected. This is highly problematic as
AI systems come with a range of dangerous consequences (Wright et al., 2023). For
instance, reducing the need for rare metal in the production of hardware components
is discussed in only 10% of patents. However, mining such metals drives deforesta-
tion and has been shown to produce pollutants and hazardous materials which enter

41

1084599

food and water supplies (Balaram, 2019; Nayar, 2021; Siqueira-Gay and Sanchez,
2020). Similarly, the (e-)waste produced by AI systems, which even less than 10%
of patents mention, can lead to hazardous chemicals entering water supplies. This
can have catastrophic affects on the health of local communities (Forti et al., 2020;
Nayar, 2021). Finally, the water consumption driven by electricity generation and
hardware cooling is a substantial factor in worldwide water scarcity (P. Li et al.,
2023; Mytton, 2021), exacerbating droughts and even limiting local communities
access to clean freshwater (Bast et al., 2022). The low number of patents working
on alleviating these environmental consequences is alarming and reflects the minimal
regulatory attention given to non-energy related impacts of AI (Coeckelbergh and
Saetra, 2023; Kak and Myers West, 2023). This study thus underscores the urgent
need for effective policy to stimulate diverse innovation that mitigates the myriad
of environmental consequences caused by the AI sector.

5.3.5 SQ 5: Major actors in sustainable AI patenting

Finally, this thesis finds that the sustainable AI patenting landscape is highly frag-
mented. The top assignee Siemens holds only 3% of patents. On the one hand,
this could be a positive sign indicating that a range of companies are interested in
innovating in this area. However, the overview of top assignees also suggests that
sustainability is not yet an important field for core AI players. IBM, Microsoft and
Google held 34%, 24% and 19%, respectively, of all AI patents in 2018 (Habibollahi
Najaf Abadi and Pecht, 2020). Combined, these three companies therefore owned
77% of all patented AI innovation. Yet, they do not hold anywhere near as large a
share of sustainability patents and do not even appear in the top 20 assignees. Given
how much intellectual prowess and resources are concentrated in these firms, it is
alarming how little they contribute to the field of sustainable AI. Designing policy
requiring powerful firms to focus more effort on this field could unlock substantial
funds and progress, necessary for achieving genuinely sustainable AI.

I also find that patent assignees in sustainable AI are highly concentrated in high
income countries, especially the USA, Germany, and Japan. On the one hand, this
is highly problematic because it extends, and creates new, long term dependencies
where especially lower and middle income countries can no longer catch up to the
technological frontier, leaving them reliant on richer economies (Hartmann et al.,
2021; D. Li et al., 2023). However, improvements in the sustainability of AI systems,
even if proposed in Europe or the US, could also widen access to AI. By lowering
the energy and resource consumption of models, AI can be used in contexts were
fewer resources are available (Fan, Yan, and Wen, 2023). By facilitating the use of
AI in healthcare or energy management, sustainability innovation could thus unlock
enormous benefits.

5.3.6 Patents as a framework of sustainable AI innovation

Overall, my findings illustrate the immense potential of investigating sustainable
AI through the lens of patents. By illuminating large-scale patterns in innovation
activity, content, and actors, patent analysis can contribute substantially to our

42

1084599

understanding of innovation in this field. The insights generated by this can in turn
function as a crucial policy guidance, informing three key takeaways. Firstly, more
research in Sustainability of AI must be incentivised, which focuses on a range of
different environmental impacts. Secondly, better reporting of the sustainability
contribution of AI for Sustainability inventions is required, where patents could
provide a useful framework. Thirdly, influential and resourceful AI players must
be incentivised to contribute more towards the sustainability of the sector. By
addressing these areas, we can pave the way for an environmentally conscious AI
landscape.

5.4 Limitations

This thesis is subject to several limitations, concerning, on the one hand, patents
as a data source, and on the other hand, the conducted NLP analysis. As dis-
cussed, patents cannot account for the specific contexts within which a technology
is produced, distributed and applied. "Sustainable" patents may therefore propose
technologies that could reduce environmental impacts, but it is not certain that they
are always used in the way intended, and how they are embedded in supply chains.
For instance, more efficient GPUs contribute little to the sustainability of AI sys-
tems when they are severely under-utilised as is often the case (Wesolowski et al.,
2021). Similarly, efficiency-enhancing technologies when applied to "dirty" sectors
such as oil and gas can actually cause more harms than benefits (Coeckelbergh and
Saetra, 2023).

Patents also capture only a subset of innovation. While I argue that this subset
is of relevant size and content, it must be acknowledged that many inventions are
not patented. Specific AI models, for instance, are often protected by trade-secrecy
rather than patents in order to have more flexibility (La Diega, 2018). Especially
academic researchers and smaller companies may forgo protection altogether and
open-source their inventions (Calvin and Leung, 2020).

Regarding the NLP analysis, one shortcoming relates to the labelling. Due to limited
resources, only 1000 patents were hand labelled and all labelling was performed by
the author with no additional human validation. While clear inclusion and exclusion
criteria were laid out and clustering validates the labelling results, this limitation
may have resulted in some bias in the data. A second shortcoming is that the
topic modelling comes with some simplifications. Not only does this approach often
focus on large scale patterns while potentially obscuring more fine-grained dynamics.
I also model topics as static over time, when especially AI as field is advancing
quickly meaning that topics may change. Nonetheless, due to the careful manual
validation as well as the presentation of specific example patents, I argue that the
topic modelling performed here can still give reliable and accurate insights into
sustainable AI innovation.

43

1084599

5.5 Avenues of future research

The findings of this study point to several avenues worthy of further attention. These
can be clustered into four strands. Firstly, this thesis reveals the urgent need for
more research aiming to make AI more sustainable. Secondly, additional evidence
is required which illuminates which areas of the AI pipeline yield the most potential
to improve the sustainability of AI systems and should thus be focused on. Thirdly,
this analysis of European patents should be complemented with research focusing
on other regions as well as open-source innovation, for instance analysing activity
on GitHub. Finally, by showing how patents can illuminate innovation patterns, I
hope to inspire further inquiry into this methodological approach. Future research
could focus on other sectors and test other NLP models in their capacity to provide
large-scale, policy-informing evidence.

44

6 | Conclusion

In recent years, the idea of harnessing AI to combat the climate crisis has gar-
nered considerable attention. Pioneering initiatives are utilising AI to tackle diverse
challenges, from flood prediction to ocean cleanup. However, it is often overlooked
that the AI sector itself is a significant contributor to greenhouse gas emissions and
environmental degradation. To establish AI that aligns with environmental sustain-
ability, it is imperative to address these two facets concurrently: we must deploy
AI to further sustainability (AI for Sustainability) and work on making AI itself
more sustainable (Sustainability of AI ). Crucially, the current techno-solutionist
discourses around AI suggest that, without effective policy intervention, innovation
efforts will not be optimally balanced between these two aspects. However, with the
climate crisis exacerbating rapidly, we cannot afford to maintain unsustainable AI
systems. Thus, to ensure that researchers and developers focus on the most press-
ing issues, it is crucial to survey innovation efforts, identifying both progress and
existing gaps. To this aim, the present thesis investigates whether patents, analysed
using NLP techniques, can provide a relevant element of inquiry for enriching our
understanding of innovation in the field of sustainable AI.

Using a text-based classifier, I reveal that the Sustainability of AI is severely under-
researched, particularly when thinking beyond energy consumption as the sole en-
vironmental cost of AI systems. Further, powerful AI players show alarmingly little
interest in sustainable AI innovation, with efforts instead stemming from electronics
and industrial engineering companies. However, there is also cause for hope: While
being in the early stages, innovation activities in both AI for Sustainability and
Sustainability of AI show a diverse range of approaches and ideas. With patent-
ing in sustainable AI on a strong upward trajectory, these hopefully represent just
the beginning of the progress necessary to align AI with environmental sustainabil-
ity. Overall, these insights reveal that patents, analysed using NLP, constitute a
highly relevant element of inquiry to improve our understanding of sustainable AI
innovation.

My results have important implications. Firstly, they powerfully illustrate the urgent
need for better policies, steering the AI sector toward sustainability. Specifically,
three key recommendations emerge. Firstly, stronger incentives are needed for com-
panies to engage in sustainable AI innovation, particularly inventions focusing on the
Sustainability of AI which take into account the variety of environmental damages
caused by AI. Secondly, we require better reporting of the sustainability contribu-
tion of AI for Sustainability inventions to avoid the promotion of technologies which
cause more harm than benefits. Thirdly, especially major AI players must be incen-
tivised to leverage their enormous resources to improve to the sustainability of the
sector. As a second contribution, my findings illuminate the immense potential of
using NLP-based patent analysis to investigate innovation activity. By providing a
labelled dataset and a classifier to distinguish between inventions in AI for Sustain-
ability and Sustainability of AI, I hope to facilitate future research in this critical
field. At the same time, the methods applied here could be used to study other
sectors and technology fields and generate large-scale, policy-informing evidence.

45

1084599

Finally, this thesis highlights one more takeaway. While companies like Google are
painting optimistic pictures of AI as the solution to global challenges, the empirical
evidence on the trajectory of sustainable AI innovation suggests a different reality.
Without careful and effective policy guidance, it remains uncertain whether these
colourful dreams of "sustainable AI" will, or should, come true.

46

Bibliography

Adams, R., Jeanrenaud, S., Bessant, J., Denyer, D., & Overy, P. (2016). Sustainability-

oriented Innovation: A Systematic Review. International Journal of Manage-
ment Reviews, 18 (2), 180–205. https://doi.org/10.1111/ijmr.12068
AI4SDG Think Tank. (2024). AI for SDGs Observatory. Retrieved April 28, 2024,
from https : / / ai - for - sdgs . academy / observatory # 12 % 20Responsible %
20Consumption%20and%20Production

Akter, M. S. (2024). Harnessing technology for environmental sustainability: Utiliz-
ing AI to tackle global ecological challenge. Journal of Artificial Intelligence
General science (JAIGS) ISSN: 3006-4023, 2 (1), 61–70. Retrieved July 2,
2024, from https://ojs.boulibrary.com/index.php/JAIGS/article/download/
97/65

Amodei, D., & Hernandez, D. (2018). AI and compute. Retrieved June 13, 2024,

from https://openai.com/index/ai-and-compute/

Aslam, S., Herodotou, H., Mohsin, S. M., Javaid, N., Ashraf, N., & Aslam, S. (2021).
A survey on deep learning methods for power load and renewable energy
forecasting in smart microgrids. Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews,
144, 110992. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rser.2021.110992

Azzam, A. (2009, December). Public Policy in Food and Agriculture. EOLSS Publi-

cations.

Balaram, V. (2019). Rare earth elements: A review of applications, occurrence, explo-
ration, analysis, recycling, and environmental impact. Geoscience Frontiers,
10 (4), 1285–1303. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.gsf.2018.12.005

Banerjee, S., Akkaya, C., Perez-Sorrosal, F., & Tsioutsiouliklis, K. (2019). Hierar-
chical Transfer Learning for Multi-label Text Classification. In A. Korhonen,
D. Traum, & L. MÃ rquez (Eds.), Proceedings of the 57th Annual Meeting of
the Association for Computational Linguistics (pp. 6295–6300). Association
for Computational Linguistics. https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/P19-1633
Bashir, N., Donti, P., Cuff, J., Sroka, S., Ilic, M., Sze, V., Delimitrou, C., & Olivetti,
E. (2024). The Climate and Sustainability Implications of Generative AI.
An MIT Exploration of Generative AI. Retrieved July 15, 2024, from https:
//mit-genai.pubpub.org/pub/8ulgrckc/release/2

Bast, D., Carr, C., Madron, K., & Syrus, A. M. (2022). Four reasons why data centers
matter, five implications of their social spatial distribution, one graphic to
visualize them. Environment and Planning A: Economy and Space, 54 (3),
441–445. https://doi.org/10.1177/0308518X211069139

Bekamiri, H., Hain, D. S., & Jurowetzki, R. (2021). PatentSBERTa: A Deep NLP
based Hybrid Model for Patent Distance and Classification using Augmented
SBERT. https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2103.11933

Beltagy, I., Lo, K., & Cohan, A. (2019). SciBERT: A Pretrained Language Model

for Scientific Text. https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.1903.10676

Beltagy, I., Peters, M. E., & Cohan, A. (2020). Longformer: The Long-Document

Transformer. https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2004.05150

47

1084599

Bessen, J., & Hunt, R. M. (2007). An Empirical Look at Software Patents. Journal
of Economics & Management Strategy, 16 (1), 157–189. https://doi.org/10.
1111/j.1530-9134.2007.00136.x

Bokrantz, J., Skoogh, A., Berlin, C., Wuest, T., & Stahre, J. (2020). Smart Main-
tenance: A research agenda for industrial maintenance management. Inter-
national Journal of Production Economics, 224, 107547. https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.ijpe.2019.107547

Bouza, L., Bugeau, A., & Lannelongue, L. (2023). How to estimate carbon footprint
when training deep learning models? A guide and review [Publisher: IOP
Publishing]. Environmental Research Communications, 5 (11), 115014. https:
//doi.org/10.1088/2515-7620/acf81b

Calvin, N., & Leung, J. (2020). Who owns artificial intelligence? A preliminary
analysis of corporate intellectual property strategies and why they matter.
Future of Humanity Institute, February. Retrieved May 21, 2024, from https:
//www.fhi.ox.ac.uk/wp-content/uploads/GovAI-working-paper-Who-owns-
AI-Apr2020.pdf

Chien, A. A., Lin, L., Nguyen, H., Rao, V., Sharma, T., & Wijayawardana, R.
(2023). Reducing the Carbon Impact of Generative AI Inference (today and
in 2035). Proceedings of the 2nd Workshop on Sustainable Computer Systems,
1–7. https://doi.org/10.1145/3604930.3605705

Coeckelbergh, M., & Saetra, H. S. (2023). Climate change and the political pathways
of AI: The technocracy-democracy dilemma in light of artificial intelligence
and human agency. Technology in Society, 75, 102406. https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.techsoc.2023.102406

Cohan, A., Feldman, S., Beltagy, I., Downey, D., & Weld, D. S. (2020). SPECTER:
Document-level Representation Learning using Citation-informed Transform-
ers. https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2004.07180

Comino, S., Manenti, F. M., & Thumm, N. (2019). The Role of Patents in Informa-
tion and Communication Technologies: A Survey of the Literature. Journal
of Economic Surveys, 33 (2), 404–430. https://doi.org/10.1111/joes.12277

Cowls, J., Tsamados, A., Taddeo, M., & Floridi, L. (2021, March). The AI Gambit.
Leveraging Artificial Intelligence to Combat Climate Change: Opportunities,
Challenges, and Recommendations. https://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.3804983

Craswell, N., Mitra, B., Yilmaz, E., Campos, D., & Voorhees, E. M. (2020). Overview
of the TREC 2019 deep learning track. https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2003.
07820

Dahlin, K. B., & Behrens, D. M. (2005). When is an invention really radical?: Defin-
ing and measuring technological radicalness. Research Policy, 34 (5), 717–737.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.respol.2005.03.009

Daim, T. U., Rueda, G., Martin, H., & Gerdsri, P. (2006). Forecasting emerging
technologies: Use of bibliometrics and patent analysis. Technological Fore-
casting and Social Change, 73 (8), 981–1012. https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j .
techfore.2006.04.004

Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs. (2024). Water abstraction
statistics: England, 2000 to 2018. Retrieved July 19, 2024, from https : / /

48

1084599

www . gov . uk / government / statistics / water - abstraction - estimates / water -
abstraction-statistics-england-2000-to-2018

Devlin, J., Chang, M.-W., Lee, K., & Toutanova, K. (2019, May). BERT: Pre-
training of Deep Bidirectional Transformers for Language Understanding
[arXiv:1810.04805 [cs]]. https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.1810.04805
Ein-Dor, L., Halfon, A., Gera, A., Shnarch, E., Dankin, L., Choshen, L., Danilevsky,
M., Aharonov, R., Katz, Y., & Slonim, N. (2020). Active Learning for BERT:
An Empirical Study. In B. Webber, T. Cohn, Y. He, & Y. Liu (Eds.), Pro-
ceedings of the 2020 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing (EMNLP) (pp. 7949–7962). Association for Computational Lin-
guistics. https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2020.emnlp-main.638

EPO. (2024a). Artificial intelligence. Retrieved July 17, 2024, from https://www.

epo.org/en/news-events/in-focus/ict/artificial-intelligence

EPO. (2024b). PATSTAT. Retrieved May 29, 2024, from https://www.epo.org/en/

searching-for-patents/business/patstat

Fan, Z., Yan, Z., & Wen, S. (2023). Deep Learning and Artificial Intelligence in
Sustainability: A Review of SDGs, Renewable Energy, and Environmental
Health. Sustainability, 15 (18), 13493. https://doi.org/10.3390/su151813493
Favot, M., Vesnic, L., Priore, R., Bincoletto, A., & Morea, F. (2023). Green patents
and green codes: How different methodologies lead to different results. Re-
sources, Conservation & Recycling Advances, 18, 200132. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.rcradv.2023.200132

Forti, V., Balde, C. P., Kuehr, R., & Bel, G. (2020). The Global E-waste Monitor
2020: Quantities, flows and the circular economy potential. Retrieved July
22, 2024, from http://collections.unu.edu/view/UNU:7737

Freire-Gonzalez, J. (2021). Governing Jevons Paradox: Policies and systemic alter-
natives to avoid the rebound effect. Energy Research & Social Science, 72,
101893. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.erss.2020.101893

Gereffi, G. (2014). Global value chains in a post-Washington Consensus world. Re-
view of International Political Economy, 21 (1), 9–37. https://doi.org/10.
1080/09692290.2012.756414

Giczy, A. V., Pairolero, N. A., & Toole, A. A. (2022). Identifying artificial intelli-
gence (AI) invention: A novel AI patent dataset. The Journal of Technology
Transfer, 47 (2), 476–505. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10961-021-09900-2
Gomez-Trujillo, A. M., Velez-Ocampo, J., & Gonzalez-Perez, M. A. (2020). A liter-
ature review on the causality between sustainability and corporate reputa-
tion: What goes first? [Publisher: Emerald Publishing Limited]. Management
of Environmental Quality: An International Journal, 31 (2), 406–430. https:
//doi.org/10.1108/MEQ-09-2019-0207

Google. (2023, October). How we are using AI to combat floods, wildfires and ex-
treme heat. Retrieved July 19, 2024, from https://blog.google/outreach-
initiatives/sustainability/google-ai-climate-change-solutions/

Google. (2024). Environmental Report 2024. Retrieved July 19, 2024, from https:
//www.gstatic.com/gumdrop/sustainability/google- 2024- environmental-
report.pdf

49

1084599

Google & Boston Consulting Group. (2023). Accelerating climate action with AI
(tech. rep.). Retrieved July 19, 2024, from https://blog.google/outreach-
initiatives/sustainability/report-ai-sustainability-google-cop28/

Grand View Research. (2023). U.S. Artificial Intelligence Market Size | Industry
Report, 2030 (tech. rep.). Retrieved July 30, 2024, from https : / / www .
grandviewresearch . com / industry - analysis / us - artificial - intelligence - ai -
market-report

Grand View Research. (2024a). Artificial Intelligence Market Report 2030 (tech.
rep.). Retrieved July 17, 2024, from https://www.grandviewresearch.com/
industry-analysis/artificial-intelligence-ai-market

Grand View Research. (2024b). Europe Artificial Intelligence Market | Industry
Report, 2030 (tech. rep.). Retrieved May 31, 2024, from https : / / www .
grandviewresearch . com / industry - analysis / europe - artificial - intelligence -
market-report

Grootendorst, M. (2022, March). BERTopic: Neural topic modeling with a class-
based TF-IDF procedure. https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2203.05794
Gunderson, R., Petersen, B., & Stuart, D. (2018). A Critical Examination of Geo-
engineering: Economic and Technological Rationality in Social Context. Sus-
tainability, 10 (1), 269. https://doi.org/10.3390/su10010269

Habibollahi Najaf Abadi, H., & Pecht, M. (2020). Artificial Intelligence Trends Based
on the Patents Granted by the United States Patent and Trademark Office.
IEEE Access, 8, 81633–81643. https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1109 / ACCESS . 2020 .
2988815

Hartmann, D., Zagato, L., Gala, P., & Pinheiro, F. L. (2021). Why did some coun-
tries catch-up, while others got stuck in the middle? Stages of productive so-
phistication and smart industrial policies. Structural Change and Economic
Dynamics, 58, 1–13. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.strueco.2021.04.007
Hascic, I., & Migotto, M. (2015). Measuring environmental innovation using patent

data (tech. rep.). OECD. Paris. https://doi.org/10.1787/5js009kf48xw-en

Henderson, P., Hu, J., Romoff, J., Brunskill, E., Jurafsky, D., & Pineau, J. (2020).
Towards the Systematic Reporting of the Energy and Carbon Footprints of
Machine Learning. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 21 (248), 1–43.
Retrieved July 14, 2024, from http://jmlr.org/papers/v21/20-312.html
Hermundsdottir, F., & Aspelund, A. (2021). Sustainability innovations and firm
competitiveness: A review. Journal of Cleaner Production, 280, 124715. https:
//doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2020.124715

Huang, Y., Giledereli, B., Koksal, A., Ozgur, A., & Ozkirimli, E. (2021). Balancing
Methods for Multi-label Text Classification with Long-Tailed Class Distribu-
tion. https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2109.04712

Hutson, M. (2023). AI for drug discovery is booming, but who owns the patents?
Nature Biotechnology, 41 (11), 1494–1496. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41587-
023-02029-7

Ibarra, H., & Rattan, A. (2018). Microsoft: Instilling a growth mindset. London
Business School Review, 29 (3), 50–53. https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1111 / 2057 -
1615.12262

50

1084599

International Energy Agency. (2021). Europe: Countries & Regions. Retrieved July

22, 2024, from https://www.iea.org/regions/europe/emissions

International Energy Agency. (2024). Electricity 2024: Analysis and key findings.
Retrieved July 18, 2024, from https://www.iea.org/reports/electricity-2024
James, G., Witten, D., Hastie, T., & Tibshirani, R. (2017). An introduction to
statistical learning : With applications in R. Springer. Retrieved June 25,
2024, from https://thuvienso.hoasen.edu.vn/handle/123456789/10495
Jeon, J., Chae, S., & Gim, J. (2020). Technical Invention Trend Analysis of Appli-
cants Based on CPC Classification. In M. Brambilla, C. Cappiello, & S. H.
Ow (Eds.), Current Trends in Web Engineering (pp. 10–17). Springer Inter-
national Publishing. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-51253-8_2
Jiang, L., & Goetz, S. (2024). Artificial Intelligence Exploring the Patent Field.

https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2403.04105

Kaack, L., Donti, P., Strubell, E., & Rolnick, D. (2020). Artificial Intelligence and
Climate Change: Opportunities, considerations, and policy levers to align AI
with climate change goals. Retrieved May 15, 2024, from https://opus4.kobv.
de/opus4-hsog/frontdoor/index/index/docId/4129

Kak, A., & Myers West, S. (2023). AI Now 2023 Landscape: Confronting Tech Power
(tech. rep.). AI Now. Retrieved July 22, 2024, from https://ainowinstitute.
org / wp - content / uploads / 2023 / 04 / AI - Now - 2023 - Landscape - Report -
FINAL.pdf

Khakurel, J., Penzenstadler, B., Porras, J., Knutas, A., & Zhang, W. (2018). The
Rise of Artificial Intelligence under the Lens of Sustainability. Technologies,
6 (4), 100. https://doi.org/10.3390/technologies6040100

Koroteev, M. V. (2021). BERT: A Review of Applications in Natural Language

Processing and Understanding. https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2103.11943

Kuntsman, A., & Rattle, I. (2019). Towards a Paradigmatic Shift in Sustainabil-
ity Studies: A Systematic Review of Peer Reviewed Literature and Future
Agenda Setting to Consider Environmental (Un)sustainability of Digital Com-
munication. Environmental Communication, 13 (5), 567–581. https : / / doi .
org/10.1080/17524032.2019.1596144

La Diega, G. N. (2018). Against the Dehumanisation of Decision-Making. Journal
of Intellectual Property, Information Technology and Electronic Commerce
Law, 9 (1), 3–34. Retrieved May 16, 2024, from https://heinonline.org/HOL/
P?h=hein.journals/jipitec9&i=6

Lacoste, A., Luccioni, A., Schmidt, V., & Dandres, T. (2019). Quantifying the Car-
bon Emissions of Machine Learning. https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.1910.
09700

Lee, K., Ippolito, D., Nystrom, A., Zhang, C., Eck, D., Callison-Burch, C., & Car-
lini, N. (2022). Deduplicating Training Data Makes Language Models Better.
https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2107.06499

Lewis, D. D. (1995). A sequential algorithm for training text classifiers: Corrigendum
and additional data. ACM SIGIR Forum, 29 (2), 13–19. https://doi.org/10.
1145/219587.219592

51

1084599

Li, D., Alkemade, F., Frenken, K., & Heimeriks, G. (2023). Catching up in clean
energy technologies: A patent analysis. The Journal of Technology Transfer,
48 (2), 693–715. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10961-021-09912-y

Li, G., Wang, X., Su, S., & Su, Y. (2019). How green technological innovation abil-
ity influences enterprise competitiveness. Technology in Society, 59, 101136.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.techsoc.2019.04.012

Li, P., Yang, J., Islam, M. A., & Ren, S. (2023). Making AI Less "Thirsty": Un-
covering and Addressing the Secret Water Footprint of AI Models. https :
//doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2304.03271

Li, S., Hu, J., Cui, Y., & Hu, J. (2018). DeepPatent: Patent classification with
convolutional neural networks and word embedding. Scientometrics, 117 (2),
721–744. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11192-018-2905-5

Ligozat, A.-L., Lefevre, J., Bugeau, A., & Combaz, J. (2022). Unraveling the Hidden
Environmental Impacts of AI Solutions for Environment. https://doi.org/
10.48550/arXiv.2110.11822

Liu, K., Wei, Z., Zhang, C., Shang, Y., Teodorescu, R., & Han, Q.-L. (2022). Towards
Long Lifetime Battery: AI-Based Manufacturing and Management. IEEE/-
CAA Journal of Automatica Sinica, 9 (7), 1139–1165. https://doi.org/10.
1109/JAS.2022.105599

Masanet, E., Shehabi, A., Lei, N., Smith, S., & Koomey, J. (2020). Recalibrating
global data center energy-use estimates. Science, 367 (6481), 984–986. https:
//doi.org/10.1126/science.aba3758

Mashhadi Rajabi, M. (2022). Dilemmas of energy efficiency: A systematic review
of the rebound effect and attempts to curb energy consumption. Energy Re-
search & Social Science, 89, 102661. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.erss.2022.
102661

McInnes, L., Healy, J., & Melville, J. (2020). UMAP: Uniform Manifold Approxi-
mation and Projection for Dimension Reduction. https://doi.org/10.48550/
arXiv.1802.03426

Mendes, M. V. I. (2023). Big Tech firms and the politics of climate change: Mapping
the low-carbon vested interests of Alphabet, Amazon, Apple, Meta. Retrieved
July 16, 2024, from http://www.rlbea.unb.br/jspui/handle/10482/45429

Menghi, R., Papetti, A., Germani, M., & Marconi, M. (2019). Energy efficiency of
manufacturing systems: A review of energy assessment methods and tools.
Journal of Cleaner Production, 240, 118276. https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j .
jclepro.2019.118276

Meyers, J. M. (2018). Artificial Intelligence and Trade Secrets. Landslide, 11 (3),
17–21. Retrieved May 14, 2024, from https://heinonline.org/HOL/P?h=
hein.journals/lndslid11&i=160

Mittal, S., Khan, M. A., Purohit, J. K., Menon, K., Romero, D., & Wuest, T.
(2020). A smart manufacturing adoption framework for SMEs. International
Journal of Production Research, 58 (5), 1555–1573. https://doi.org/10.1080/
00207543.2019.1661540

Mohamadi, A., Heidarizadi, Z., & Nourollahi, H. (2016). Assessing the desertifica-
tion trend using neural network classification and object-oriented techniques
(Case study: Changouleh watershed - Ilam Province of Iran). Journal of the

52

1084599

Faculty of Forestry Istanbul University, 66 (2), 683–690. https://doi.org/10.
17099/jffiu.75819

Morelli, J. (2013). Environmental Sustainability: A Definition for Environmental
Professionals. Journal of Environmental Sustainability, 1 (1). https : / / doi .
org/10.14448/jes.01.0002

Morozov, E. (2013). To save everything, click here: The folly of technological solu-

tionism. PublicAffairs.

Mytton, D. (2021). Data centre water consumption [Publisher: Nature Publishing
Group]. npj Clean Water, 4 (1), 1–6. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41545-021-
00101-w

Nachtwey, O., & Seidl, T. (2024). The Solutionist Ethic and the Spirit of Digital
Capitalism [Publisher: SAGE Publications Ltd]. Theory, Culture & Society,
41 (2), 91–112. https://doi.org/10.1177/02632764231196829

Naidu, R., Diddee, H., Mulay, A., Vardhan, A., Ramesh, K., & Zamzam, A. (2021).
Towards Quantifying the Carbon Emissions of Differentially Private Machine
Learning. https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2107.06946

Nayar, J. (2021). Not so ’green’ technology: The complicated legacy of rare earth

mining. Harvard International Review, 12.

Nearing, G., Cohen, D., Dube, V., Gauch, M., Gilon, O., Harrigan, S., Hassidim,
A., Klotz, D., Kratzert, F., Metzger, A., Nevo, S., Pappenberger, F., Prud-
homme, C., Shalev, G., Shenzis, S., Tekalign, T. Y., Weitzner, D., & Matias,
Y. (2024). Global prediction of extreme floods in ungauged watersheds. Na-
ture, 627 (8004), 559–563. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-024-07145-1
Neyman, J. (1992). On the Two Different Aspects of the Representative Method:
The Method of Stratified Sampling and the Method of Purposive Selection.
In S. Kotz & N. L. Johnson (Eds.), Breakthroughs in Statistics: Methodology
and Distribution (pp. 123–150). Springer. https://doi.org/10.1007/978- 1-
4612-4380-9_12

Nishant, R., Kennedy, M., & Corbett, J. (2020). Artificial intelligence for sustain-
ability: Challenges, opportunities, and a research agenda. International Jour-
nal of Information Management, 53, 102104. https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j .
ijinfomgt.2020.102104

Noel, M., & Schankerman, M. (2013). Strategic Patenting and Software Innovation.
The Journal of Industrial Economics, 61 (3), 481–520. https://doi.org/10.
1111/joie.12024

NVIDIA. (2022). Corporate Responsibility Report (tech. rep.). Retrieved July 16,
2024, from https : / / images . nvidia . com / aem - dam / en - zz / Solutions / csr /
FY2022-NVIDIA-Corporate-Responsibility.pdf

Patterson, D., Gonzalez, J., Le, Q., Liang, C., Munguia, L.-M., Rothchild, D., So, D.,
Texier, M., & Dean, J. (2021). Carbon Emissions and Large Neural Network
Training. https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2104.10350

Pila, J. (2019). European intellectual property law (2nd edition.). University Press.
Qiu, S., Yang, H., Huang, Z., & Shen, D. (2023). Transformer-based Siamese Neural
Network Face Verification Method. 2023 8th International Conference on
Intelligent Computing and Signal Processing (ICSP), 15–19. https : / / doi .
org/10.1109/ICSP58490.2023.10248213

53

1084599

Ram Nidumolu, C. K. P. (2009). Why Sustainability Is Now the Key Driver of
Innovation. Harvard Business Review. Retrieved July 16, 2024, from https:
//hbr.org/2009/09/why-sustainability-is-now-the-key-driver-of-innovation

Rikap, C. (2023). Capitalism as usual? Implications of digital intellectual monop-
olies. New Left Review, 139, 145–160. Retrieved July 17, 2024, from https:
/ / discovery. ucl . ac . uk / id / eprint / 10185469 / 1 / Cecilia % 20Rikap % 2C %
20Capitalism%20as%20Usual%20%2C%20NLR%20139%2C%20January%
20February%202023.pdf

Rolnick, D., Donti, P. L., Kaack, L. H., Kochanski, K., Lacoste, A., Sankaran, K.,
Ross, A. S., Milojevic-Dupont, N., Jaques, N., Waldman-Brown, A., Luccioni,
A., Maharaj, T., Sherwin, E. D., Mukkavilli, S. K., Kording, K. P., Gomes, C.,
Ng, A. Y., Hassabis, D., Platt, J. C., . . . Bengio, Y. (2019). Tackling Climate
Change with Machine Learning. https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.1906.05433
Saetra, H. S. (2023). Technology and Sustainable Development: The Promise and

Pitfalls of Techno-Solutionism. Taylor & Francis.

Serban, A. C., & Lytras, M. D. (2020). Artificial Intelligence for Smart Renewable
Energy Sector in Europe: Smart Energy Infrastructures for Next Generation
Smart Cities [Conference Name: IEEE Access]. IEEE Access, 8, 77364–77377.
https://doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2020.2990123

Shenoy, P. (2023). Energy-Efficiency versus Carbon-Efficiency: What’s the differ-
ence? SIGENERGY Energy Inform. Rev., 2 (4), 1–2. https : / / doi . org / 10 .
1145/3584024.3584025

Siqueira-Gay, J., & Sanchez, L. E. (2020). Keep the Amazon niobium in the ground.
Environmental Science & Policy, 111, 1–6. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envsci.
2020.05.012

Stasis, S., Stables, R., & Hockman, J. (2016). Semantically Controlled Adaptive
Equalisation in Reduced Dimensionality Parameter Space. Applied Sciences,
6 (4), 116. https://doi.org/10.3390/app6040116

Stein, A. L. (2020). Artificial Intelligence and Climate Change Special Issue: Reg-
ulating the Technological Frontier. Yale Journal on Regulation, 37 (3), 890–
939. Retrieved July 14, 2024, from https://heinonline.org/HOL/P?h=hein.
journals/yjor37&i=902

Sun, R. (2019). Optimization for deep learning: Theory and algorithms. https://

doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.1912.08957

Tharwat, A., & Schenck, W. (2023). A Survey on Active Learning: State-of-the-
Art, Practical Challenges and Research Directions. Mathematics, 11 (4), 820.
https://doi.org/10.3390/math11040820

Tomasev, N., Cornebise, J., Hutter, F., Mohamed, S., Picciariello, A., Connelly, B.,
Belgrave, D. C. M., Ezer, D., Haert, F. C. v. d., Mugisha, F., Abila, G., Arai,
H., Almiraat, H., Proskurnia, J., Snyder, K., Otake-Matsuura, M., Othman,
M., Glasmachers, T., Wever, W. d., . . . Clopath, C. (2020). AI for social
good: Unlocking the opportunity for positive impact. Nature Communica-
tions, 11 (1), 2468. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-020-15871-z

Touvron, H., Lavril, T., Izacard, G., Martinet, X., Lachaux, M.-A., Lacroix, T.,
Roziere, B., Goyal, N., Hambro, E., Azhar, F., Rodriguez, A., Joulin, A.,
Grave, E., & Lample, G. (2023). LLaMA: Open and Efficient Foundation

54

1084599

Language Models [arXiv:2302.13971 [cs]]. https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.
2302.13971

UNFCCC. (2024). AI4ClimateAction. Retrieved July 19, 2024, from https://unfccc.

int/ttclear/artificial_intelligence

van Wynsberghe, A. (2021). Sustainable AI: AI for sustainability and the sustain-
ability of AI. AI and Ethics, 1 (3), 213–218. https://doi.org/10.1007/s43681-
021-00043-6

Vaswani, A., Shazeer, N., Parmar, N., Uszkoreit, J., Jones, L., Gomez, A. N., Kaiser,
Å. u., & Polosukhin, I. (2017). Attention is All you Need. Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems, 30. Retrieved June 25, 2024, from https://
papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2017/hash/3f5ee243547dee91fbd053c1c4a845aa-
Abstract.html

Veale, M., & Borgesius, F. Z. (2021). Demystifying the Draft EU Artificial Intelli-
gence Act. Analysing the good, the bad, and the unclear elements of the pro-
posed approach. Computer Law Review International, 22 (4), 97–112. https:
//doi.org/10.9785/cri-2021-220402

Veefkind, V., Hurtado-Albir, J., Angelucci, S., Karachalios, K., & Thumm, N. (2012).
A new EPO classification scheme for climate change mitigation technologies.
World Patent Information, 34 (2), 106–111. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.wpi.
2011.12.004

Verdecchia, R., Cruz, L., Sallou, J., Lin, M., Wickenden, J., & Hotellier, E. (2022).
Data-Centric Green AI An Exploratory Empirical Study. 2022 International
Conference on ICT for Sustainability (ICT4S), 35–45. https://doi.org/10.
1109/ICT4S55073.2022.00015

Verdecchia, R., Sallou, J., & Cruz, L. (2023). A systematic review of Green AI.
WIREs Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery, 13 (4), e1507. https://doi.
org/10.1002/widm.1507

Verendel, V. (2023). Tracking artificial intelligence in climate inventions with patent
data [Publisher: Nature Publishing Group]. Nature Climate Change, 13 (1),
40–47. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41558-022-01536-w

Vinuesa, R., Azizpour, H., Leite, I., Balaam, M., Dignum, V., Domisch, S., Fellaen-
der, A., Langhans, S. D., Tegmark, M., & Fuso Nerini, F. (2020). The role of
artificial intelligence in achieving the Sustainable Development Goals. Nature
Communications, 11 (1), 233. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-019-14108-y

Wang, H., Zhong, R. Y., Liu, G., Mu, W., Tian, X., & Leng, D. (2019). An op-
timization model for energy-efficient machining for sustainable production.
Journal of Cleaner Production, 232, 1121–1133. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
jclepro.2019.05.271

Wesolowski, L., Acun, B., Andrei, V., Aziz, A., Dankel, G., Gregg, C., Meng, X.,
Meurillon, C., Sheahan, D., Tian, L., Yang, J., Yu, P., & Hazelwood, K.
(2021). Datacenter-Scale Analysis and Optimization of GPU Machine Learn-
ing Workloads. IEEE Micro, 41 (5), 101–112. https://doi.org/10.1109/MM.
2021.3097287

Widdicks, K., Lucivero, F., Samuel, G., Croxatto, L. S., Smith, M. T., Holter, C. T.,
Berners-Lee, M., Blair, G. S., Jirotka, M., Knowles, B., Sorrell, S., Rivera,
M. B., Cook, C., Coroama, V. C., Foxon, T. J., Hardy, J., Hilty, L. M.,

55

1084599

Hinterholzer, S., & Penzenstadler, B. (2023). Systems thinking and efficiency
under emissions constraints: Addressing rebound effects in digital innovation
and policy. Patterns, 4 (2). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.patter.2023.100679

WIPO. (2010). IPC GREEN INVENTORY. Retrieved June 25, 2024, from https:

//www.wipo.int/classifications/ipc/green-inventory/home

WIPO. (2019). WIPO technology trends 2019: Artificial intelligence. Geneva: World

Intellectual Property Organization.

Word Economic Forum. (2018). Fourth Industrial Revolution for the Earth Series:
Harnessing Artificial Intelligence for the Earth (tech. rep.). Retrieved May
31, 2024, from https://www3.weforum.org/docs/Harnessing_Artificial_
Intelligence_for_the_Earth_report_2018.pdf

World Economic Forum. (2024). 9 ways AI is helping tackle climate change. Re-
trieved July 19, 2024, from https://www.weforum.org/agenda/2024/02/ai-
combat-climate-change/

Wright, D., Igel, C., Samuel, G., & Selvan, R. (2023). Efficiency is Not Enough: A
Critical Perspective of Environmentally Sustainable AI. https://doi.org/10.
48550/arXiv.2309.02065

Wu, C.-J., Raghavendra, R., Gupta, U., Acun, B., Ardalani, N., Maeng, K., Chang,
G., Aga, F., Huang, J., Bai, C., Gschwind, M., Gupta, A., Ott, M., Melnikov,
A., Candido, S., Brooks, D., Chauhan, G., Lee, B., Lee, H.-H., . . . Hazelwood,
K. (2022). Sustainable AI: Environmental Implications, Challenges and Op-
portunities. Proceedings of Machine Learning and Systems, 4, 795–813. Re-
trieved May 31, 2024, from https : / / proceedings . mlsys . org / paper _ files /
paper/2022/hash/462211f67c7d858f663355eff93b745e-Abstract.html
Yang, G.-C., Li, G., Li, C.-Y., Zhao, Y.-H., Zhang, J., Liu, T., Chen, D.-Z., & Huang,
M.-H. (2015). Using the comprehensive patent citation network (CPC) to
evaluate patent value. Scientometrics, 105 (3), 1319–1346. https://doi.org/
10.1007/s11192-015-1763-7

Yang, Z., Nguyen, T. T. H., Nguyen, H. N., Nguyen, T. T. N., & Cao, T. T. (2020).
Greenwashing behaviours: Causes, taxonomy and consequences based on a
systematic literature review [Number: 5]. Journal of Business Economics and
Management, 21 (5), 1486–1507. https://doi.org/10.3846/jbem.2020.13225

Zhang, B., Davoodi, A., & Hu, Y. H. (2018). Exploring Energy and Accuracy Trade-
off in Structure Simplification of Trained Deep Neural Networks. IEEE Jour-
nal on Emerging and Selected Topics in Circuits and Systems, 8 (4), 836–848.
https://doi.org/10.1109/JETCAS.2018.2833383

Zhu, T., Wang, X., Zhao, F., & Torrico-Bascope, G. V. (2023). Impedance-Based
Aggregation of Paralleled Power Factor Correction Converters in Data Cen-
ters. IEEE Transactions on Power Electronics, 38 (4), 5254–5265. https://
doi.org/10.1109/TPEL.2022.3230645

56

A | Keyword searches for Sustainability of AI la-

belled patents

For constructing the keyword searches, I used two groups of keywords. On the one
hand, I used general descriptive words indicating that an AI technology is made more
sustainable. On the other hand, I used keywords capturing example technologies
along the AI pipeline that likely fall under Sustainability of AI. Keywords are listed
in Table A.1.

Keywords

Keywords

energy-efficient ai
sustainable ai
green computing
renewable energy for ai
carbon-neutral ai
power-aware ai
energy-efficient algorithm
resource-constrained ai
eco-conscious ai
environmentally friendly ai
green machine learning
carbon-neutral machine learning
power-aware machine learning
energy-efficient machine learning
resource-constrained machine learning
eco-conscious machine learning
environmentally friendly machine learning
energy-efficient hardware
power-efficient ai
sustainable machine learning
green neural networks
sustainable deep learning
energy-efficient inference
environmentally conscious ai
green data centers

model compression
pruning
efficient network
memory utilisation
edge-based computing
edge computing
data cente
data centre
cooling
low precision
hardware acceleration
gpu
tpu
fpga
tensor processing
lightweight CNN
sparse computing
quantization
batch optimization
batch optimisation
huffman coding
uninterruptible power supply
data augmentation
hardware utilisation
hardware utilization

Table A.1: Keyword search list to sample Sustainability of AI related patents

57

B | Zero-shot topic descriptions

To analyse how innovation is spread across different elements of the AI pipeline,
zero-shot topic modelling was used. For this, pre-defined topic descriptions are
required, based on which documents are assigned to a topic. The topic descriptions
are listed Table B.1. Note that some experimentation revealed that descriptions
based on examples showed much more sensible clustering compared to meta-level
descriptions.

High-level
overview

Data collection

AI operations

Operations

Infra-
structure

Topic description

Platform

Model

Specialised
Hardware

Infrastructure

Network

Storage

General
Hardware

sensor, data collection, environmental monitoring,
IoT sensors

platform for optimization techniques, framework, li-
brary

algorithmic design, weights, pruned, parallelism,
model compression

computation, specialized acceleration, application-
specific integrated circuits, field-programmable gate
array

network infrastructure, bandwidth, data transmis-
sion, routers, cable, switch, firewall, connectivity

storage, storage area network, network-attached
storage, distributed file system

data center, uninterruptible power supply, power
distribution unit, generator, cooling, ventilation,
pump, chiller, low-precision hardware

Table B.1: Zero-shot topic descriptions

58

C | Environmental impact keyword list

For analysing the environmental impact of Sustainability of AI innovation, I used
a keyword search. The four main environmental impacts of AI suggested by the
literature relate to energy consumption, water consumption, (e-)waste and resource
depletion, particularly rare metals which are crucial for many hardware components
(Ligozat et al., 2022). Table C.1 presents the list of keywords used to identify
the categories which was iteratively adjusted to capture relevant patents in each
category.

Impact

Keywords

Energy consumption

energy efficiency, low power, energy saving, power reduction, energy efficient,
energy-efficient, power efficiency, energy consumption, power consumption, electricity
consumption, run time, runtime, efficiency, efficient

Water consumption

water-efficient, water-saving, reduced water use, water consumption

Rare metals

Waste

rare-earth-free, alternative materials, reduced metal usage, rare metal, niobium, aluminium,
europium, gold, silver, platinum, palladium, tin, tantalum, tungsten, bismuth, cadmium,
cobalt, gallium, germanium, indium, lithium, molybdenum, selenium, tellurium, vanadium,
zirconium

recyclable, waste reduction, biodegradable, recycled materials, recycling, re-
cycle, waste, toxic, end of life, durability, longevity, extended life, increase
lifetime, lifespan, long-lasting, long life

Table C.1: Environmental impact keyword lists

59

